제 3 교시

2010학년도 대학수학능력시험 문제지
외국어(영어) 영역

1

홀수형

7. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 남자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을 

고르시오. 

①  to  replace  the  old  bed  with  a  new  one 
②  to  order  a  heater  from  the  Internet
③  to  set  the  room  temperature  higher
④  to  buy  an  electric  blanket
⑤  to  go  shopping  together

8. 대화를  듣고,  두  사람이  대화하고  있는  장소로  가장  적절한 

곳을 고르시오.

①  학교 방송실
④  119  상황실

②  신문사 편집실 ③  광고사 기획실

⑤  도서관 휴게실

9. 대화를 듣고,  두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.

①  보안 요원 - 가수

②  스턴트맨 - 분장사

③  운동선수 - 트레이너

④  영화감독 - 시나리오 작가

⑤  건축 설계사 - 건물주 

10. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

①  마술 배우기

③  새장 준비하기

⑤  마술 클럽 가입하기

②  노래 부르기

④  마술 의상 빌려오기

11. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고,  두 사람이 공연을 관람하게 될 

날짜를 고르시오.

①

②

③

④

⑤

  1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 방송을 잘 

듣고 답을 하기 바랍니다. 듣는 내용은 한 번만 방송됩니다.

1. 대화를 듣고,  두 사람이 주문할 야외용 식탁을 고르시오.

③

①

④

②

⑤

2. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 심정으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

①  frustrated
④  satisf ied 

②  jealous
⑤  grateful

③  indifferent

3. 다음을 듣고,  무엇에 관한 설명인지 고르시오.

①  설사약

④  소화제

②  멀미약

⑤  구충제

③  항생제

4. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 

①  환영 표지판 만들기

②  공항에 마중 나가기

③  집에 친구 초대하기
⑤  시내 관광 시켜주기

④  자매 학교 방문하기

5. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 지불할 총 금액을 고르시오.  [3점]

①  $180
④  $250

②  $190
⑤  $290

③  $220

6. 다음을  듣고,  남자가  하는  말의  목적으로  가장  적절한  것을 

12. World  Tea  Championship에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고,  일치하지 

고르시오.

①  새로 개관한 공연장을 홍보하려고

②  공연장 놀이방 운영을 공지하려고

③  공연 장소 변경에 대해 사과하려고

④  공연장 내 질서 유지를 당부하려고

⑤  공연장 물품 보관소에 대해 안내하려고

않는  것을 고르시오.

①  녹차를 포함하여 세 부문에서 경쟁이 이루어진다.
②  예선에서 15개국을 대표하는 참가자들이 경쟁했다.
③  결선에서의 심사 기준은 색,  향,  맛이다.

④  결선 심사는 이전 우승자들이 담당한다.
⑤  결선 진출자들에게 Tea  Master  칭호를 부여한다.

1

8

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

외국어(영어) 영역

홀수형

13. 다음 그림의 상황에 가장 적절한 대화를 고르시오.  [1점]

① 

② 

③ 

④ 

⑤ 

14. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 

  이제 듣기․말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지

의 지시에 따라 답을 하기 바랍니다.

18. 밑줄 친 This[this]가 가리키는 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?  [1점]

This,  in  the  simplest  definition,  is  a  promise  enforceable 
by  law.  The  promise  may  be  to  do  something  or  to  stop 
from  doing  something.  The  making  of  this  requires  the 
mutual  agreement  of  two  or  more  persons  or  parties,  one  of 
them  ordinarily  making  an  offer  and  another  accepting.  If 
one  of  the  parties  fails  to  keep  the  promise,  the  other  has 
rights  to  compensation.  The  law  about  this  considers  such 
questions  as  whether  this  exists,  what  the  meaning  of  this 
is,  whether  this  has  been  broken,  and  what  compensation  is 
due  to  the  injured  party.

적절한 것을 고르시오.

①  계약

②  고소

③  의회

④  신용

⑤  선거

Woman:                                                                                         

①  I  think  so.  My  uncle  likes  the  game,  too.
②  All  right.  I’ll  go  to  the  website  right  now.
③  Not  really.  The  package  will  arrive  in  time.
④  It’s  my  fault.  I  wish  I  hadn’t  returned  the  game.
⑤  I  agree.  We  shouldn’t  download  games  illegally.

15. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 

적절한 것을 고르시오.

Man:   

①  Well  done!  I’ll  buy  you  another  monitor  after  work.
②  Calm  down.  You  can  rewrite  the  report  tomorrow.
③ That’s  incredible!  The  program  is  so  easy  to  use.
④  Thanks  for  the  tip.  I’ll  go  see  if  I  can  use  it.
⑤  What  a  pity!  I  won’t  back  it  up  next  time.

16. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 

적절한 것을 고르시오.

Woman:   

①  Not  at  all.  It’s  my  pleasure  to  help  you  out.
②  I’m  afraid  it’s  too  late  to  make  a  reservation.
③  I  think  taking  the  train  will  be  better  for  me.
④  It’s  OK.  We’ll  get  there  in  about  half  an  hour.
⑤  I  don’t  think  so.  I  planned  to  meet  my  friend  here.

17. 다음  상황  설명을  듣고,  아버지가  Julie에게  할  말로  가장 

적절한 것을 고르시오.

Julie’s  father:                                                                               

① Be  happy.  At  least  you’re  healthy.
② Cheer  up.  Let’s  take  it  to  another  hospital.
③ I’m  sorry.  There’s  nothing  we  can  do  anyway.
④ That’s  too  bad.  I’ve  always  liked  cats  better  anyway.
⑤ Don’t  worry.  There  are  six  other  puppies  to  play  with.

19. 밑줄 친 He[he]가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른  것은?

It  was  a  beautiful  Friday  afternoon  and  the  weekend  was 
about  to  begin,  but  Rob  had  a  lot  on  his  mind.  ① He  had 
been  putting  off  doing  his  chemistry  report  which  was  due 
on  Monday.  After  borrowing  some  books  from  the  library, 
he  went  home.  Later  that  evening,  ② he  was  doing  the 
assignment  when  his  father  came  in.  “What  are  you  doing, 
kid?”  he  asked.  “Biography  of  Marie  Curie,”  Rob  said 
absently  as  ③ he  was  typing  on  his  computer.  “Really? 
I  did  that  for  a  chemistry  assignment  when  I  was  in  school,” 
his  father  said.  “Why  don’t  you  find  some  information 
from 
there?” ④ he  added.  Rob 
grabbed  the  encyclopedia.  He  smiled  thinking  that  even 
though  he  was  practically  born  playing  computer  games, 
⑤ he  was  still  doing  the  same  assignments  his  father  did 
over  20  years  ago.

the  encyclopedia  over 

20. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?  [1점]

Upon  receiving  your  last  letter,  I  rushed  to  look  up 
the  word  ‘flattering’  in  the  dictionary.  I  was  shocked 
to  find  out  that  it  could  imply  something  negative,  which 
I  certainly  did  not  mean.  I  should  have  used  some  word 
like  ‘complimentary’  instead.  For  that,  I  would  like  to  ask 
for  the  kindness  in  your  heart  to  forgive  my  unintended 
offense.  If  you  knew  me  well,  you  would  know  that  I  am 
shameless  enough  to  take  all  compliments  at  their  face 
value  and  not  to  think  that  they  might  be  mere  flattery. 
I  just  did  not  know  what  the  word  really  implied.  I  hope 
that  you  no  longer  feel  hurt  or  uncomfortable  in  any  way 
as  a  result  of  our  correspondence.

① 무례한 태도에 대하여 항의하려고
② 훌륭하게 쓰여진 편지를 칭찬하려고
③ 단어를 잘못 사용한 것에 대하여 사과하려고
④ 전문 용어에 대한 정확한 의미를 문의하려고
⑤ 좋은 사전을 선물해 준 것에 대하여 감사하려고

2

8

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
홀수형

외국어(영어) 영역
외국어(영어) 영역

3
3

21. (A),  (B),  (C)의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장 

[24～28] 다음 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

적절한 것은?

While  awaiting  the  birth  of  a  new  baby,  North  American 
parents  typically  furnish  a  room  as  the  infant’s  sleeping 
quarters.  For  decades,  child-rearing  advice  from  experts  has 
(A) encouraged / been encouraged  the  nighttime  separation  of 
baby  from  parent.  For  example,  a  study  recommends  that 
babies  be  moved  into  their  own  room  by  three  months  of 
age.  “By  six  months  a  child  (B) who / whom  regularly 
sleeps  in  her  parents’  room  is  likely  to  become  dependent 
on  this  arrangement,”  reports  the  study.  Yet  parent-infant 
‘co-sleeping’  is  the  norm  for  approximately  90  percent  of 
the  world’s  population.  Cultures  as  (C) diverse / diversely  
as  the  Japanese,  the  Guatemalan  Maya,  and  the  Inuit  of 
Northwestern  Canada  practice  it.

(A)

(B)

(C)

① encouraged
②  encouraged
③  encouraged
④ been  encouraged …… who …… diverse
⑤ been  encouraged …… whom …… diverse

…… who …… diverse
…… whom …… diversely
…… who …… diversely

22. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중,  어법상 틀린  것은?

is  much  more  capable  of  operating 

While  manned  space  missions  are  more  costly  than 
unmanned ① ones,  they  are  more  successful.  Robots  and 
astronauts  use ② much  of  the  same  equipment  in  space.  But 
a  human 
those 
instruments  correctly  and  ③ to  place  them  in  appropriate  and 
useful  positions.  Rarely  ④ is  a  computer  more  sensitive  and 
accurate  than  a  human  in  managing  the  same  geographical 
or  environmental  factors.  Robots  are  also  not  equipped  with 
capabilities  like  humans  to  solve  problems ⑤ as  they  arise, 
and  they  often  collect  data  that  are  unhelpful  or  irrelevant.

23. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는  문장은?

Most  of  you  experience  urges  when  trying  to  break  a  habit 
and  these  can  be  hard  to  resist  unless  you  find  something 
else  to  do  instead,  and  best  of  all,  something  that  uses  the 
same  part  of  the  body ― even  the  same  muscles.  ① If  the 
habit  involves  your  hands,  as  when  pulling  out  hair,  then  try 
to  occupy  them  in  some  other  way.  ② Playing  with  a  toy  or 
opening  and  closing  your  fists  for  a  couple  of  minutes  might 
be  an  answer.  ③ The  habit  of  scratching  can  be  replaced 
with  rubbing  in  some  lotion  or  patting  with  the  palm  of  the 
hand. ④ If  the  itches,  however,  do  not  disappear,  stop 
the  medicine. ⑤ One 35-year-old 
scratching  and 
woman  who  used  to  rub  her  eyes  with  her  hands  until  they 
became  sore  and  infected  found  it  helpful  to  put  on  make-up 
when  she  was  tempted  to  rub.

take 

24. In  this  modern  world,  people  are  not  used  to  living  with 
discomfort.  We  expect  immediate  results  and  satisfaction. 
We  want  answers  faster  than  they  can  be  delivered.  There 
is  twenty-four-hour  repair  and  round-the-clock  shopping. 
If  we  are  hungry,  there  is  always  food  available,  from 
stores  and 
microwave  dinners 
restaurants.  People  no  longer  know  how  to  wait,  or  even 
what  waiting  means.  It  is  nice  to  have  what  you  want  when 
you  want  it,  but  the  ability  to  delay  satisfaction  is  important.   
                                          is  clearly  an  important  virtue,  yet 
so  many  people  stand  in  front  of  their  microwaves  thinking 
“Hurry  up!”

to  all-night  grocery 

①  Ambition
④  Modesty

②  Patience
⑤  Diligence

③  Honesty

25. The  goal  of  medicine  as  it  is  currently  practiced  is  to 
develop  procedures  and  drugs  that  work  equally  well  on 
all  patients,  regardless  of  gender,  age,  or  genetics.  It 
derives  from  the  prevalent  belief  that  all  of  us  are  similar 
bio-mechanical  units  that  rolled  off  the  same  assembly  line
― a  most  imperfect  conception  of  human  beings  that  limits 
conventional  medicine’s  effectiveness.  The  doctor  of  the  future, 
however,  needs 
in  fundamentally 
to  practice  medicine 
different  ways.  One  of  the  most  important  shifts  will  be  an 
increased  recognition  of                                          ,  a  concept 
now  largely  ignored.  Instead  of  treating  different  patients 
the  same  drugs, 
that  display  similar  symptoms  with 
doctors  should  identify  root  causes  of  disease  to  come  up 
with  a  personalized  treatment. 

①  group  therapy
③  medical  technology
⑤  wonder  drugs

②  patient  individuality
④  doctors’  qualifications

26. For  the  most  part,  we  like  things  that  are  familiar  to  us. 
To  prove  the  point  to  yourself,  try  a  little  experiment.  Get 
the  negative  of  an  old  photograph  that  shows  a  front  view 
of  your  face  and  have  it  developed  into  a  pair  of  pictures ―
one  that  shows  you  as  you  actually  look  and  one  that 
shows  a  reverse  image  so  that  the  right  and  left  sides  of 
your  face  are  interchanged.  Now  decide  which  version  of 
your  face  you  like  better  and  ask  a  good  friend  to  make 
the  choice,  too.  If  you  are  like  most  people,  you  should 
notice  something  odd:  Your  friend  will  prefer  the  true 
print,  but  you  will  prefer  the  reverse  image.  Why?  Because 
you  both  will  be  responding  favorably  to  the  more  familiar 
face ― your  friend  to                                            and  you  to  the 
reversed  one  you  find  in  the  mirror  every  day.  [3점]

* negative:  [사진]  원판

①  his  own  true  face
②  other  people’s  faces
③  the  one  the  world  sees
④  the  negative  of  his  own  face
⑤  the  one  more  recently  photographed

3

8

4

외국어(영어) 영역

홀수형

27. The  human  auditory  system                                                    . 
A  psychologist  named  Richard  Warren  demonstrated  this 
particularly  well.  He  recorded  a  sentence  and  cut  out  a 
piece  of  the  sentence  from  the  recording  tape.  He  replaced 
the  missing  piece  with  a  burst  of  static  of  the  same 
duration.  Nearly  everyone  who  heard  the  altered  recording 
could  report  that  they  heard  both  a  sentence  and  static.  But 
a  majority  of  people  could  not  tell  where  the  static  was! 
The  auditory  system  had  filled  in  the  missing  speech 
information,  so  that  the  sentence  seemed  uninterrupted.  Most 
people  reported  that  there  was  static  and  that  it  existed 
apart  from  the  spoken  sentence.  The  static  and  the  sentence 
formed  separate  perceptual  streams  due  to  differences  in  the 
quality  of  sound  that  caused  them  to  group  separately.

* static:  잡음(雜音)

①  recognizes  incorrect  pronunciation
②  plays  an  important  role  in  speaking
③  has  its  own  version  of  perceptual  completion
④  reacts  differently  according  to  different  languages
⑤  analyzes  auditory  and  visual  cues  at  the  same  time

in 

the 

their  plays 

28. Not  all  authors  trusted  that  the  theater  audience  would 
automatically  understand 
intended 
manner.  Thus,  they  repeatedly  attempted  to  make  it  clear  to 
their  public  that  visiting  the  theater  was  not  merely  for  the 
purpose  of  entertainment,  but  rather  to  draw  lessons  from 
the  play  offered  onstage.  It  was,  therefore,  important  for 
the  viewer                                                              so  as  to  facilitate 
interpretation  of  the  content.  This  idea  was  developed  by 
Bertolt  Brecht  with  his  ‘epic  theater,’  which  used  alienation 
as  a  strategy  to  prevent  the  identification  of  the  public  with 
the  figures  of  the  drama.  Through  scattered  narration  and 
commentary  throughout  the  play,  for  example,  the  viewers 
are  invited  to  take  a  step  back  from  the  performance.  In 
this  way,  they  are  given  hints  to  better  understand  the  play 
while  the  conclusion  is  left  open  so  as  to  leave  them  to 
draw  their  own  conclusions.  [3점]

①  to  imitate  the  actor’s  performance
②  to  learn  about  the  play  beforehand
③  to  identify  himself  with  the  actors  on  the  stage
④  to  bridge  the  gap  between  himself  and  the  actors
⑤  to  create  a  distance  from  the  actions  on  the  stage

29. 다음 글의 상황에 나타난 분위기로 가장 적절한 것은?

After  dinner  he  built  a  fire,  going  out  into  the  weather  for 
wood  he  had  piled  against  the  garage.  The  air  was  bright 
and  cold  against  his  face,  and  the  snow  in  the  driveway  was 
already  halfway  to  his  knees.  He  gathered  logs,  shaking  off 
their  soft  white  caps  and  carrying  them  inside.  He  sat  for  a 
time  in  front  of  the  fireplace,  cross-legged,  adding  logs,  and 
gazing  at  the  warm  fire.  Outside,  snow  continued  to  fall 
quietly  in  the  cones  of  light  cast  by  the  streetlights.  By  the 
time  he  rose  and  looked  out  the  window,  his  car  had 
become  a  soft  white  hill  on  the  edge  of  the  street.

4

8

①  calm  and  peaceful
③  funny  and  amusing
⑤  promising  and  hopeful

②  lively  and  festive
④  exciting  and  thrilling

30. 다음 그림에 대한 글의 내용 중, 밑줄 친 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 

않은  것은?

Figures  A  and  B  demonstrate  how  dew  point  is  measured 
by  a  dew  point  hygrometer.  In  Figure  A,  light  is  transmitted 
from  a  laser  and ① reflected  off  the  mirror  onto  a  receiver 
that  measures  the  intensity  of  the  observed  light.  When  the 
mirror  temperature  is  above  dew  point  and  the  intensity  of 
the  transmitted  light  is  10 mW/cm2,  the  intensity  of  the 
observed  light  is ② the  same.  In  Figure  B,  when  the  mirror 
temperature  is  at  dew  point,  dew  drops  cover  the ③ surface 
of  the  mirror.  When  the  transmitted  light  hits  the  dew  drops, 
it  becomes ④ scattered.  As  a  consequence,  compared  to  the 
intensity  of  the  transmitted  light,  that  of  the  observed  light 
measured  by  the  receiver  is  ⑤ increased.

* hygrometer:  습도계  ** mW/cm2

:  빛의 세기 단위

31.

(A),  (B),  (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 적절한 

것은?

lost 

in  company  surveys 

Responses  to  survey  questions  are  influenced  by  events, 
and  we  should  consider  this  when  reviewing  the  results  of 
a  survey.  The  reputation  of  an  airline,  for  example,  will 
be (A)  damaged / recovered if  a  survey  is  conducted  just 
its 
after  a  plane  crash.  A  computer  company 
reputation 
just  after  major  news 
coverage  about  a  defect  in  its  products.  On  the  positive 
side,  surveys  by  a  beverage  company  about  its  image 
showed  very (B) hostile / favorable public  attitudes 
just 
after  its  massive  investment  in  the  Olympics.  Consequently, 
surveys  should  be  conducted  when  the  organization  is  not 
in  the  news  or  connected  to  a  significant  event  that 
may  influence  public  opinion.  In  neutral  context,  a  more 
(C) valid / biased survey  can  be  conducted  about  an 
organization’s  reputation,  products,  or  services.

      (A)

    (B)

  (C)

① damaged …… hostile …… biased
②  damaged …… hostile …… valid
③  damaged …… favorable …… valid
④ recovered …… hostile …… biased
⑤ recovered …… favorable …… valid

홀수형

외국어(영어) 영역
외국어(영어) 영역

5
5

32. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A),  (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?

War  seems  to  be  part  of  the  history  of  humanity. 
Countries,  regions,  and  even  villages  were  economically 
independent  of  one  another  in  the  past.  Under  those 
circumstances,  the  destruction  of  our  enemy  might  have 
been  a  victory  for  us.  There  was  a  relevance  to  violence 
and  war.        (A)      ,  today  we  are  so  interdependent  that  the 
concept  of  war  has  become  outdated.  When  we  face 
problems  or  disagreements  today,  we  have  to  arrive  at 
solutions  through  dialog.  We  must  work  to  resolve  conflicts 
in  a  spirit  of  reconciliation  and  always  keep  in  mind  the 
interests  of  others.  We  cannot  destroy  our  neighbors!  We 
cannot  ignore  their  interests!  Doing  so  would  ultimately 
cause  us  to  suffer.        (B)      ,  the  concept  of  violence  is  now 
unsuitable,  and  nonviolence  is  the  appropriate  method.

        (B)

      (A)
…… Otherwise
① However
②  However
…… Therefore
③  Nonetheless …… Otherwise
④ Similarly …… Therefore
⑤ Similarly …… In  contrast

[33～34] 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
33. Imagine  that  you  are  in  a  meeting.  Your  party  and  the 
other  party  are  sitting  across  a  table.  You  ask  a  question  on 
a  particular  subject  and  the  answer  is  unsatisfactory.  What 
would  be  the  best  response?  It  is  none  at  all.  So  if  you  are 
seeking  more  information  or  a  different  kind  of  information, 
ask  for  it  by  remaining  silent.  When  there  is  a  long  pause 
in  the  conversation,  people  feel  an  overwhelming  need  to 
fill  it.  If  someone  has  finished  speaking  and  you  do  not 
play  along  by  taking  up  your  end  of  the  dialog,  that  person 
will  automatically  start  to  elaborate.  Eventually,  they  may 
say  what  you  want  to  hear.

①  의견 교환 시 대화 예절의 중요성
②  대화를 통한 창의적 사고 신장의 필요성
③  바람직한 대화를 위한 적극적 태도의 필요성
④  회의의 효율적 진행을 위한 사회자의 중요성
⑤  만족스러운 답변을 얻기 위한 침묵의 효용성

34. A  forest  fire  in  Brazil  affects  the  weather  in  Moscow  by 
creating  huge  dust  clouds  that  eventually  float  over  Russia. 
Every  element  in  an  ecosystem  depends  on  every  other 
element,  even  the  so-called  nonliving  elements  such  as 
minerals,  oxygen,  and  sunlight.  Yes,  light  is  an  integral 
element  of  all  life.  The  sun  is  food  for  many  of  earth’s  life 
forms.  Physicists  speak  of  photons  of 
light  as  being 
interchangeable.  When  the  light  from  an  object  hits  a 
person,  only  some  of  it  bounces  off.  Most  of  the  photons 
are  absorbed  into  the  person.  Its  energy  becomes  that 
person’s  energy.  This  is  how  incredible  interdependence  is
― everything  is  constantly  becoming  everything  else. 

①  the  connectedness  of  elements  in  nature
②  the  importance  of  light  as  a  food  source
③  the  effects  of  forest  fires  on  the  environment
④  the  causes  of  dramatic  changes  in  the  weather
⑤  the  consequences  of  the  destruction  of  ecosystems

35. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는  문장은?

The  graph  above  shows  the  growth  rate  of  total  output  in 
the  U.S.  from  1960  to  1999.  The  growth  rate  of  total  output 
is  equal  to  the  growth  rate  in  the  number  of  hours  worked 
plus  the  growth  rate  of  labor  productivity. ① The  1960-1969 
period  displayed  the  highest  growth  rate  of  total  output  of 
all  the  periods  in  the  graph. ② The  growth  rate  of  total 
output  declined  from  the  1960-1969  period  to  the  1980-1989 
period. ③ The  only  period  where  the  growth  rate  in  the 
number  of  hours  worked  exceeded  the  labor  productivity 
growth  rate  was  the  1980-1989  period. ④ The  1990-1994 
period  showed  an  increase  in  the  growth  rate  of  total  output 
from the 1980-1989 period. ⑤ The 1995-1999 period displayed 
the  second  highest  growth  rate  of  total  output  and  the  greatest 
labor  productivity  growth  rate  of  all  the  time  periods.

36. 다음 글에서 smallmouth  bass에 관한 내용과 일치하는 것은?

Like  its  largemouth  cousin,  the  smallmouth  bass  is  a 
native  of  the  Mississippi  drainage,  which  makes  it  a  true 
heartland  fish.  Whereas  the  largemouth  likes  slow  or  still 
water  with  lots  of  food-holding  weeds,  the  smallmouth 
prefers  clean,  rocky  bottoms  and  swifter  water,  ideally  in 
the  range  of  65°  to  68°F.  In  waters  warmer  than  73°F, 
you  can  forget  about  finding  one.  In  lakes,  smallmouth 
often  school  up,  which  means  that  if  you  catch  one,  you 
can  catch  a  bunch.  In  rivers  and  streams,  they  are  more 
solitary.  The  smallmouth  has  a  series  of  dark  vertical 
bands  along  its  sides.  The  dorsal  fin  is  one  continuous  fin 
(as  opposed  to  the  separated  dorsal  fin  of  the  largemouth).

* dorsal  fin:  등지느러미

① Mississippi강으로 유입된 외래종이다.
② 물의 흐름이 느린 곳을 좋아한다.
③ 73°F  이상의 물에서 쉽게 찾아 볼 수 있다.
④  호수보다 강에서 떼를 지어 다닌다. 
⑤  몸통의 옆면에는 거무스름한 띠들이 있다.

* photon:  광자(光子)

5

8

6

외국어(영어) 영역

홀수형

37. Chattanooga에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은?

in 

Starting 

there  remained 

the  1960s,  people  began  flooding 

into 
Chattanooga,  a  former  factory  town,  to  explore  its  caves, 
rivers,  and  cliffs.  Before  long  more  than  3,800  caves 
surrounding  the  city  had  been  discovered.  The  nearby 
Ocoee  was  among  the  most  paddled  rivers  in  the  country 
and  six  major  climbing  sites  sprang  up  within  an  hour’s 
drive  of  city  limits.  But  in  spite  of  this  boundless  outdoors 
potential, 
the  problem  of  Chattanooga 
proper,  a  post-industrial  wasteland  that  made  the  city  the 
kind  of  place  you  would  visit  but  would  never  want  to  live 
in.  Not, 
the  past  decade, 
Chattanooga  has  made  an 
incredible  urban  comeback: 
electric  buses,  organic  markets,  and  a  120-million-dollar 
In 
riverfront 
restoration  project  completed 
addition,  beautiful  modern  architecture 
the 
post-modern  museum  and  the  newly  remodeled  aquarium 
plays  a  big  role  in  the  comeback  of  Chattanooga.

last  year. 
such  as 

lately.  Over 

is,  until 

that 

① 강,  절벽 등을 탐험하기 위해 1960년대부터 사람들이 몰려들었다. 
② 주변에서 3,800개 이상의 동굴들이 발견되었다.
③ 주요 등반 장소가 도시 경계에서 차로 한 시간 이내의 거리에 생겼다.
④ 강변지역 복구 사업은 일억 이천만 달러를 들여 진행되고 있다.
⑤ 현대식 건축물들이 도시의 모습을 되찾는 데 큰 역할을 하고 있다.

that 

[38～39] 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
38. In  practical  situations  where  there  is  no  room  for  error, 
we  have  learned  to  avoid  vagueness  in  communication.  A 
fire  chief,  for  example,  needs  to  issue  his  orders  with 
absolute  clarity.  In  imaginative  situations,  however,  there  is 
the  danger 
limit  your 
imagination.  Let’s  suppose  that  the  same  fire  chief  has 
asked  you  to  paint  a  picture  on  the  side  of  his  firehouse.  If 
he  tells  you  what  he  wants  it  to  look  like  right  down  to  the 
last  detail,  he  has  not  given  you  any  room  for  your 
the  assignment  were  stated 
imagination.  However, 
somewhat  vaguely,  then  you  would  have  more  room  to 
think  and  be  more  creative. 

too  much  specificity  can 

if 

① 소방관들은 업무 수행 시 정확한 의사소통이 필요하다.
② 상사는 부하의 업무에 지나치게 간섭하지 않는 것이 좋다.
③ 정확한 정보 해석을 위해서 여러 가능성을 고려해야 한다.
④ 대화에서는 애매한 표현을 사용하지 않는 것이 바람직하다.
⑤ 상상력이 필요한 상황에서는 다소 모호한 말이 도움이 될 수 있다.

39. Although  a  speech  can  be  effective,  all  the  words  in  the 
world  cannot  measure  up  to  the  example  of  a  leader, 
especially  in  communicating  new  behaviors  and  values. 
There  is  often  no  more  effective  way  to  help  people 
understand  the  message  than  to  have  it  modeled  for  them  by 
the  manager.  Words  can  yield  a  variety  of  interpretations  in 
terms  of  the  kind  of  behaviors  people  think  they  mean.  But 
a  manager’s  actions  provide  a  clear  model  of  exactly  the 
kind  of  behavior  required.  Managers  who  want  people  to 
take  a  more  team-based  approach  with  their  people,  for 
example,  will  almost  certainly  get  better  results  by  taking  a 
more  team-based  approach  themselves  rather  than  just  by 
making  a  speech  on  teamwork.

①  Old  habits  die  hard.
②  Time  waits  for  no  man.
③  Two  heads  are  better  than  one.
④  Actions  speak  louder  than  words.
⑤  A  bird  in  the  hand  is  worth  two  in  the  bush.

40. 글의 흐름으로 보아,  주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 

곳은?

However,  now  that  the  economy  is  characterized  more 
by  the  exchange  of  information  than  by  hard  goods, 
geographical  centrality  has  been  replaced  by  attempts  to 
create  a  sense  of  cultural  centrality. 

to  create 

Now,  as  always,  cities  are  desperate 

the 
impression  that  they  lie  at  the  center  of  something  or  other. 
( ① ) This  idea  of  centrality  may  be  locational,  namely 
that  a  city  lies  at  the  geographical  center  of  England,  Europe, 
and  so  on. ( ② ) This  draws  on  a  well-established  notion 
that  geographical  centrality  makes  a  place  more  accessible, 
easing  communication  and  communication  costs. ( ③ ) 
Cultural  centrality  usually  demonstrates  itself  as  a  cry  that  a 
city  is  at  the  center  of  the  action. ( ④ ) This  means  that 
the  city  has  an  abundance  of  cultural  activities,  such  as 
restaurants,  theater,  ballet,  music,  sport,  and  scenery. ( ⑤ ) 
The  suggestion  is  that  people  will  want  for  nothing  in  this 
city.

[41～42] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

in 

tribal  societies 

it.  Interestingly,  art 

41. Young  children  rarely  think  of  their  art  as  personal 
property.  Often  they  throw  it  away  or  give  it  away.  This 
suggests  that  much  of  the  value  of  art  for  a  child  consists 
in  making 
is 
frequently  abandoned  after  it  has  served  its  purpose.  The 
focus  is  on  the  magical,  expressive,  and  social  value  of  the 
act  of  making.  Some  contemporary  artists  share 
this 
feeling,  but  they  are  also  caught  up  in  the  system  of  art 
exhibition,  the  selling  of  their  art,  and  the  requirements  of 
an  art  market.  This  results  in  a  tension  in  the  art  world  that 
tension  between  art  as  a 
is 
satisfying  mode  of  expression  and  art  as  a  precious 
collectible  object,  between  the  experience  of  making  and 
the  experience  of  owning. 

largely  unresolved ― the 

①  Art  in  Tribal  Societies
②  Conflicting  Views  on  Art 
③  Traditional  vs.  Contemporary  Art
④  Using  Art  for  Children’s  Education
⑤  Modern  Art  Museums:  Magical  Places

6

8

홀수형

외국어(영어) 영역
외국어(영어) 영역

7
7

42. The  age  of  3½  is  not  without  its  charm.  One  of  the 
more  amusing  aspects  of  this  age  is  the  child’s  often  vivid 
imagination,  expressed  most  strikingly  in  his  enjoyment  of 
imaginary  companions.  Though  some  people  have  felt  that 
only  the  lonely  play  with  imaginary  playmates,  our  research 
makes  it  very  evident  that  it  is  often  the  highly  superior 
and  imaginative  child  who  invents  these  creatures.  They  are 
very  real  to  him,  very  important,  and,  we  can  assure  you, 
quite  harmless.  Even  though  it  may  be  annoying  to  have  to 
lay  a  place  at  dinner  or  keep  an  extra  seat  in  the  family 
automobile  for  his  ‘friend’  who  exists  only  in  your  child’s 
imagination,  it  is  probably  well  worthwhile.

①  Making  New  Friends  at  School
②  Be  a  Role  Model  for  Your  Child
③  How  Can  You  Make  Your  Child  Creative?
④  Child’s  Imaginary  Friend:  Need  for  Worry?
⑤  Various  Aspects  of  Children’s  Imagination

44. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?

How  can  you  create  closeness  when  the  two  of  you  are 
hundreds  of  miles  apart?  How  can  you  make  the  person  you 
are  talking  to  on  the  phone  feel  special  when  you  cannot  pat 
their  back  or  give  them  a  little  hug?  The  answer  is  simple. 
Just  use  your  caller’s  name  far  more  often  than  you  would 
in  person.  In  fact,  shower  your  conversations  with  his  or  her 
name.  Saying  a  person’s  name  too  often  in  face-to-face 
conversation  sounds  manipulative.  However,  on  the  phone 
the  effect  is  dramatically  different.  If  you  heard  someone  say 
your  name,  even  if  you  were  being  pushed  around  in  a  big 
noisy  crowd,  you  would  pay  attention  and  listen.

① 멀리 사는 친구와의 우정을 위해 가끔씩 전화해라. 

② 대화 중에는 상대의 몸짓에 나타나는 의미를 잘 살펴라.

③ 공공장소에서는 너무 큰 소리로 전화 통화를 하지 마라.

④ 시끄러운 장소에서 친구와 대화할 때는 평소보다 천천히 말해라.

⑤ 전화 통화에서 친밀감을 주려면 상대의 이름을 자주 불러주어라.

45. 다음  글의  내용을  한  문장으로  요약하고자  한다.  빈칸  (A)와 

(B)에  들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?

43. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?

Rosalyn’s  parents  did  everything  possible  to  avoid 
favoring  one  child  over  the  others,  and  this  resulted  in 
her  feelings  being  hurt.  One  year  Rosalyn  asked  her 
mother  to  prepare  a  special  treat  for  her  birthday:  the 
honey  cake  that  Rosalyn  had  always  loved. 

(A) Upon  receiving  the  cake,  Rosalyn  became  disappointed. 
It  was,  after  all,  her  birthday;  couldn’t  she  be  singled 
out  on  one  day  of  the  year?  A  parent’s  admirable 
efforts  not  to  play  favorites  can  mean  that  no  child  gets 
the  whole  cake  of  parental  love.

(B) Her  mother  said  she  couldn’t.  If  she  made  a  honey  cake 
for  Rosalyn,  she’d  have  to  make  cakes  for  Rosalyn’s 
two  sisters,  and  she  didn’t  have  time  to  make  three  cakes.

(C) In  the  end,  her  mother  did  give  Rosalyn  a  honey  cake 
on  her  birthday ― a  really  small  one,  because  she 
split  the  batter  for  one  cake  into  three  parts,  to  treat 
her  daughters  equally.

* batter:  반죽

①  (A) - (C) - (B) ②  (B) - (A) - (C) ③  (B) - (C) - (A)
④  (C) - (A) - (B) ⑤  (C) - (B) - (A)

7

8

Many  years 

ago,  psychologists  performed 

an 
experiment  in  which  they  put  a  number  of  people  in  a 
room,  alone  except  for  a  ring  toss  set.  It  was  one  of  those 
children’s  toys  with  a  short  wooden  post  held  upright  on 
the  floor  and  a  bunch  of  round  rings.  The  subjects  were 
left  alone  to  amuse  themselves  as  best  they  could.  As 
expected,  with  time  to  kill,  they  began  trying  to  toss  the 
rings  around  the  post.  What  the  psychologists  discovered 
was  that  most  of  the  people  moved  far  enough  away  from 
the  post  so 
it  was 
challenging  but  not  so  difficult  as  to  be  totally  frustrating. 
In  other  words,  they  deliberately  positioned  themselves 
between  frustration  on  the  one  hand  and  boredom  on  the 
other.  The  process  of  alternately  producing  and  relieving 
tension  was  what  made  the  activity  stimulating.

the  rings  around 

tossing 

that 

󰀻

Subjects  tended  to  make  a  ring  toss  activity  stimulating 
by  producing  just  enough        (A)        through  varying  the 
distance  to  the  post  so  as  to        (B)        frustration  and 
boredom.

   (B)
  (A)
…… create
① tension
②  tension
…… balance
③  competition …… multiply
④ energy
⑤ energy

…… hide
…… increase

 
 
8

외국어(영어) 영역

홀수형

[46～48] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오. 

48. 위 글의 ‘I’에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은?

(A)

On  the  wall  of  our  dining  room  was  a  framed  quotation: 
“Let  me  live  in  a  house  by  the  side  of  the  road  and  be  a 
friend  to  man.”  It  inspired  in  me  countless  childhood 
daydreams  about  meeting  new  people  from  exotic  places. 
I  was  a  child  who  desperately  wanted  to  connect  with 
others.  We  did  live  ‘by  the  side  of  the  road’ ― on  Route  9 
in  a  place  so 
between  Keene  and  Portsmouth ― but 
remote  it  was  extremely  difficult  to  be  a  ‘friend  to  man.’

(B)

Why  couldn’t  others  also  benefit  from  that  value?  I  could 
save  people  the  trouble  of  going  into  the  store  by  making 
my  produce  accessible  at  the  side  of  the  road,  and  that 
would  provide  value,  too.  Surely  I  could  convince  people 
to  pay  half  of  what  the  grocery  store  charged  and  to  feel 
lucky  about  the  bargain.  Suddenly,  I  saw  a  connection 
between  those  bumpy  vegetables  on  our  table  and  the 
quotation  on  the  wall;  I  found  a  way  to  satisfy  my  longing 
for                                          .  These  homely  fruits  and  vegetables 
would  become  my  golden  apples.

(C)

One  day  when  our  family  drove  into  town,  I  focused 
intently  on  the  big,  paper,  grocery  store  signs  advertising  the 
same  type  of  produce  that  we  grew:  ‘carrots,  50  cents  a 
bunch,’  ‘tomatoes,  99  cents  a  pound.’  Meanwhile,  I  thought 
of  how  the  type  of  ‘imperfect’  produce  we  ate  for  dinner, 
just  as  healthy  as  that  sold  at  the  store,  was  often  tossed 
on  the  compost  heap  or  left  in  the  ground.

① Keene과 Portsmouth  사이의 9번 도로변에 살았다.
② 식료품점에 가는 사람들의 수고를 덜어줄 수 있다고 생각했다.

③ 식료품점의 당근과 토마토 광고를 주의깊게 보았다. 
④ 토마토를 파운드당 99센트에 팔았다.
⑤ 모양이 이상해 식료품점에서 팔지 않는 야채도 가치있다고 생각했다.

[49∼50] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오. 

A  friend  of  mine  and  his  wife  were  in  Hawaii,  standing 
on  a  beach,  watching  a  beautiful  sunset ― hardly  able  to 
believe  how  magnificent 
the  sight  was.  A  woman 
approached  them  and  overheard  my  friend’s  wife  say, 
“I  can’t  believe  how  beautiful  this  is.”  While  walking  away 
from  the  spectacular  display,  the  woman  said,  “You 
should  have  seen  it  in  Tahiti.” 

When  your  attention  is  not  on  the  present  moment  but 
on  something  else,  you  will  tend  to                                          , 
as  the  Tahiti  traveler  did,  or  you  will  wonder  about  future 
experiences  instead  of  enjoying  the  present  one,  and  regret 
past  experiences  because  they  are  already  over.  But  as  you 
learn  to  bring  your  attention  back  to  the  here  and  now, 
life  will  come  alive  again,  providing  the  enjoyment  and 
satisfaction  it  was  meant  to.  Thus,  when  you  live  in  the 
present  moment,  one  of  the  nice  things  that  happens  to  you 
is  that  ordinary,  everyday  life  takes  on  a  new  significance. 
Taking  walks,  watching  a  sunset,  gardening,  reading  a 
book,  all  begin  to  feel  special.  When  your  attention  is 
brought  back  to  the  here  and  now,  you  engage  in  life  rather 
than  think  about  life.

* compost  heap:  퇴비 더미

49. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?

(D)

The  unattractive  produce  such  as  crooked  carrots  and 
odd-looking  tomatoes  was  not  valuable  to  the  grocery 
store,  where  only  ‘perfect’  produce  was  sold.  But  I  knew 
they  would  have  value  to  people  who  would  chop  them 
into  salads  or  soups,  can  them,  or  use  them  to  make  pies, 
because  that  is  what  our  family  did  with  them.  They  were 
fresh  and  clean  and  came  straight  from  the  good  earth.

46. 위 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 

적절한 것은?

①  (B) - (C) - (D) ②  (B) - (D) - (C) ③  (C) - (B) - (D)
④  (C) - (D) - (B) ⑤  (D) - (C) - (B)

①  think  about  future  events  in  your  life
②  concentrate  better  on  the  event  at  hand
③  compare  even  good  experiences  with  others
④  be  totally  satisfied  with  the  ongoing  event
⑤  share  the  moment  with  your  loved  ones

50. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?

①  Living  Today  to  the  Fullest
②  Traveling  to  Exotic  Places
③  What  Are  Friends  for?
④  Releasing  Your  Hidden  Power
⑤  Creating  Future-Oriented  Attitudes

47. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?

①  new  friends
③  mass  production
⑤  complete  independence

②  family  reunions
④  farm  reconstruction

*  확인 사항

◦ 답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인

하시오.

8

8

