제 3 교시        

2011학년도 대학수학능력시험 문제지

외국어(영어) 영역

홀수형

성명

        수험 번호                    ―

○ 문제지의 해당란에 성명과 수험 번호를 정확히 쓰시오.

○ 답안지의  해당란에  성명과  수험  번호를  쓰고,  또  수험  번호,  문형

(홀수/짝수), 답을 정확히 표시하시오.

○ 문항에 따라 배점이 다르니, 각 물음의 끝에 표시된 배점을 참고하시오. 

1점과  3점  문항에만  점수가  표시되어  있습니다.  점수  표시가  없는 

문항은 모두 2점입니다.

※ 시험이 시작되기 전까지 표지를 넘기지 마시오.

한국교육과정평가원

제 3 교시

2011학년도 대학수학능력시험 문제지
외국어(영어) 영역

1

홀수형

  1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 방송을 잘 

듣고 답을 하기 바랍니다. 듣는 내용은 한 번만 방송됩니다.

1. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 구입할 자전거를 고르시오. 

①

②

③

④

⑤

2. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 심정으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

①  scared
④  annoyed

②  delighted
⑤  sympathetic

③  encouraged

3. 다음을  듣고,  남자가  하는  말의  주제로  가장  적절한  것을 

고르시오.

①  연령에 따른 성격의 변화
②  나쁜 잠버릇을 고치는 방법
③  타고난 기질이 안 바뀌는 이유
④  수면 자세와 성격 간의 관련성
⑤  혈액형과 성격 간의 연관 가능성

7. 대화를  듣고,  남자가  여자에게  부탁한  일로  가장  적절한  것을 

고르시오.

①  to  repair  his  broken  computer
②  to  install  an  ad  blocking  program
③  to  place  a  pop-up  ad  on  a  website
④  to  help  him  block  spam  text  messages
⑤  to  let  him  know  the  name  of  a  program

8. 대화를  듣고,  두  사람이  대화하고  있는  장소로  가장  적절한 

곳을 고르시오. 

①  농구 경기장
④  실내 수영장

②  권투 시합장
⑤  육상 경기장

③  빙상 경기장

9. 대화를 듣고,  두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.

―  고객
①  은행 직원
―  간호사 
②  의사
③  경찰관
―  보행자 
④  아파트 경비원 ―  방문객
―  관람객
⑤  매표소 직원

10. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

①  꽃 사러 가기
③  졸업식 참석하기
⑤  전자사전 구입하기

②  놀이공원 가기
④  쇼핑몰 구경하기

11. 다음  표를  보면서  대화를  듣고,  두  사람이  방문할  박물관을 

고르시오.

4. 대화를  듣고,  남자가  여자를  위해  할  일로  가장  적절한  것을 

고르시오.

①  세차 도와주기
③  휴대전화 수리 맡기기
⑤  차량 운행 시간 알려 주기

②  버스 기사에게 전화하기
④  터미널 휴게실 청소하기

5. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 주문한 물건 값으로 한 달에 지불할 금액을 

고르시오.  [3점]

①  $ 60

②  $ 120 ③  $ 250 ④  $ 360 ⑤  $ 400

①

②

③

④

⑤

6. 다음을  듣고,  여자가  하는  말의  목적으로  가장  적절한  것을 

고르시오.

①  음식물 보관 방법을 설명하려고
②  기금 마련 바자회를 홍보하려고
③  학생들의 기부 참여를 독려하려고 
④  피자 파티의 일정 변경을 알리려고
⑤  양로원 자원 봉사 활동을 안내하려고 

12. The  Walk  of  Harmony에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고,  일치하지 

않는  것을 고르시오. 

①  4월 10일 토요일에 개최될 예정이다.
②  다문화 가정에 대한 인식을 높이기 위한 행사이다. 
③  비가 올 경우에는 행사가 취소된다. 
④  8세 미만의 아동은 어른이 꼭 동반해야 한다. 
⑤  참가 신청서는 웹 사이트에서 내려 받을 수 있다.

1

8

2

외국어(영어) 영역

홀수형

13. 다음 그림의 상황에 가장 적절한 대화를 고르시오.  [1점]

18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?  [1점]

My  wife  and  I  have  enjoyed  receiving  your  publication 
for  years.  Unfortunately,  our  jobs  now  have  us  both  traveling 
most  weeks,  and  we  simply  cannot  keep  up  with  a  daily 
paper.  So  we  would  like  to  request  that  you  stop  delivery 
to  our  home.  If  you  have  questions  about  this  matter,  please 
leave  a  message  at  (212) 555-5612,  and  either  my  wife  or 
I  will  call  you  back  as  soon  as  we  can.  Thank  you  for 
years  of  reliable  delivery  of  a  first-rate  newspaper.  If  our 
situation  changes,  we  will  call  you  to  resume  delivery.  In 
the  meantime,  we  will  expect  delivery  to  stop  no  later  than 
the  end  of  this  week.

①  여행 동행 제안을 거절하려고
②  신문 배달 중단을 요청하려고
③  출판 일정에 대해 문의하려고
④  변경된 전화번호를 안내하려고
⑤  신속한 정정 보도에 감사하려고

19. 밑줄 친 she [her]가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른  것은?

Kate  and  Joan,  who  had  not  seen  each  other  for  three 
months,  were  chatting  happily  in  Joan’s  apartment.  After 
a  short  conversation,  Joan  went  to  prepare  coffee.  Soon 
① she  came  back  with  the  cups  and  saucers  and  put  them 
down  on  a  small  side  table.  While  Joan  was  looking  for 
a  tablecloth,  Kate  was  wandering  around  the  room  looking 
at  the  pictures  on  the  walls.  Intent  on  one  of  the  pictures, 
② she  took  a  step  back  and  hit  the  small  table,  tipping  it 
over.  All  the  cups  and  saucers  were  broken.  Kate  felt 
guilty  for ③ her  negligence.  As  she  helped  Joan  clean  up, 
④ she  tried  to  think  of  a  way  to  compensate  her  for  the 
damage.  Later,  Joan  mentioned  that  she  was  looking  for 
volunteers  to  work  in  a  fair  she  was  organizing.  Although 
Kate  had  something  important  to  do  on  that  particular 
Sunday,  she  decided  to  cancel  ⑤ her  plans  and  volunteer 
to  help  Joan.

20. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중,  어법상 틀린  것은?

The  word  ‘courage’  takes  on  added  meaning  if  you  keep  in 
mind  that  it  is  derived  from  the  Latin  word  ‘cor’  ① meaning 
‘heart.’  The  dictionary  defines  courage  as  a  ‘quality  which 
enables  one  to  pursue  a  right  course  of  action, through   
② which  one  may  provoke  disapproval,  hostility,  or  contempt.’ 
Over  300  years  ago  La  Rochefoucauld  went  a  step  further 
when  he  said:  “Perfect  courage  is  to  do  unwitnessed  what 
we  should  be  capable  of  doing  before  all  men.”  It  is  not 
easy ③ to  show  moral  courage  in  the  face  of  either 
indifference  or  opposition.  But  persons  who  are  daring  in 
taking  a  wholehearted  stand  for  truth  often  ④ achieving 
results  that  surpass  their  expectations.  On  the  other  hand, 
half hearted  individuals  are  seldom  distinguished  for  courage 
even  when  it  involves ⑤ their  own  welfare.  To  be  courageous 
under  all  circumstances  requires  strong  determination.

* provoke:  유발하다

① 

  ② 

  ③ 

  ④ 

  ⑤

14. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 

적절한 것을 고르시오.

Man:     

①  I’m  here  to  buy  a  suit  for  my  concert.
②  I’ll  tell  you  who’s  available  by  tomorrow.
③  I  hope  you’re  feeling  better  from  the  flu.
④  I  think  we  should  put  on  the  show  right  now.
⑤  I  want  to  thank  you  for  finding  a  replacement.

15. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 

적절한 것을 고르시오. 

Woman:                                                             

①  I’m  not  interested  in  those  club  activities.
②  This  rock  concert  is  sure  to  be  a  big  success.
③  My  dream  is  to  be  the  world  chess  champion.
④  That’s  a  great  way  to  play  musical  instruments.
⑤  If  you  make  them,  I’ll  help  you  post  them  up.

16. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 

적절한 것을 고르시오. 

Man:     

①  Don’t  fix  what  isn’t  broken.
②  I’d  move  mountains  for  you.
③  It’s  better  to  be  safe  than  sorry. 
④  You  can’t  please  the  whole  world.
⑤  Time  f lies  when  you’re  having  fun. 

17. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고,  Amy가 택시 기사에게 할 말로 가장 

적절한 것을 고르시오.

Amy:       

①  Could  you  let  me  off  here?
②  Does  this  taxi  go  to  N  Seoul  Tower?
③  Is  there  a  shortcut  to  Gyeongbokgung?
④  How  long  does  it  take  to  get  to  the  market?
⑤  Can  you  recommend  a  place  to  visit  in  Seoul?

  이제 듣기․말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 

지시에 따라 답을 하기 바랍니다.

2

8

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                           
홀수형

외국어(영어) 영역
외국어(영어) 영역

3
3

21. (A),  (B),  (C)의  각 네모  안에서  어법에  맞는  표현으로  가장 

[24～29] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

적절한 것은?

We  anticipate  the  future  as  if  we  found  it  too  slow  in 
coming  and  we  were  trying  to  hurry  it  up.  (A) So / Such  
imprudent  are  we  that  we  wander  about  in  times  that 
are  not  ours  and  do  not  think  of  the  one  that  belongs 
to  us.  We  try  to  support  the  present  with  the  future 
and  (B) think / thinking  of  arranging  things  we  cannot 
control,  for  a  time  we  have  no  certainty  of  reaching. 
Examine  your  thoughts,  and  you  will  find  them  wholly 
(C) to  occupy / occupied  with  the  past  or  the  future.  We 
almost  never  think  of  the  present,  and  if  we  do  so,  it  is 
only  to  shed  light  on  our  plans  for  the  future.  The  past 
and  the  present  are  our  means;  only  the  future  is  our  end.

(A)

(B)

(C)

…… thinking …… occupied
…… think
…… think

① So
…… to  occupy
②  So
③  So
…… occupied
④ Such …… thinking …… occupied
⑤ Such …… thinking …… to  occupy

22. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는  문장은?

Consider  the  following  implication  involving  the  role  of 
social  bonds  and  affection  among  group  members.  If  strong 
bonds  make  even  a  single  dissent  less  likely,  the  performance 
of  groups  and  institutions  will  be  impaired. ① A  study  of 
investment  clubs  showed  that  the  worst-performing  clubs 
were  built  on  affective  ties  and  were  primarily  social,  while 
the  best-performing  clubs  limited  social  connections  and 
focused  on  making  money. ② Dissent  was  far  more  frequent 
in  the  high-performing  clubs. ③ The  low  performers  usually 
voted  unanimously,  with  little  open  debate. ④ As  illustrated 
in  the  study,  the  high  performers  placed  more  importance  on 
social  bonds  than  the  low  performers,  resulting  in  their  high 
rate  of  success. ⑤ The  central  problem  is  that  the  voters  in 
low-performing  groups  were  trying  to  build  social  cohesion 
rather  than  to  produce  the  highest  returns. 

23. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?

I  have  always  taught  my  children  that  politeness,  learning, 
and  order  are  good  things,  and  that  something  good  is  to  be 
desired  and  developed  for  its  own  sake.  But  at  school  they 
learned,  and  very  quickly,  that  children  earn  Nature  Trail 
tickets  for  running  the  quarter-mile  track  during  lunch 
recess.  Or  Lincoln  Dollars  for  picking  up  trash  on  the 
playground  or  for  helping  a  young  child  find  the  bathroom
― deeds  that  used  to  be  called  ‘good  citizenship.’  Why  is 
it  necessary  to  buy  the  minimal  cooperation  of  children  with 
rewards  and  treats?  What  disturbs  me  is  the  idea  that  good 
behavior  must  be  reinforced  with  incentives.  Children  must 
be  taught  to  perform  good  deeds  for  their  own  sake,  not  in 
order  to  receive  stickers,  stars,  and  candy  bars.

①  남을 배려하는 마음을 갖도록 아이들을 가르쳐야 한다.
②  아이들이 서로 협력할 수 있도록 분위기를 조성해야 한다.
③ 잘못된 행동을 할지라도 아이들을 무조건 혼내지 말아야 한다.
④ 아이들이 보상 없이도 바람직한 행동을 하도록 가르쳐야 한다.
⑤ 아이들이 바른 시민으로 성장할 수 있도록 모범을 보여야 한다.

24. In  a  classic  set  of  studies  over  a  ten-year  period,  biologist 
Gerald  Wilkinson  found  that,  when  vampire  bats  return  to 
their  communal  nests  from  a  successful  night’s  foraging,  they 
frequently  vomit  blood  and  share  it  with  other  nest-mates, 
including  even  non-relatives.  The  reason,  it  turns  out,  is  that 
blood-sharing  greatly  improves  each  bat’s  chances  of  survival. 
A  bat  that  fails  to  feed  for  two  nights  is  likely  to  die. 
Wilkinson  showed  that  the  blood  donors  are  typically  sharing 
their  surpluses  and,  in  so  doing,  are  saving  unsuccessful 
foragers  that  are  close  to  starvation.  So  the  costs  are 
relatively  low  and  the  benefits  are  relatively  high.  Since  no 
bat  can  be  certain  of  success  on  any  given  night,  it  is  likely 
that  the  donor  will  itself  eventually  need  help  from  some 
nest-mate.  In  effect,  the  vampire  bats  have  created  a  kind 
of                                       .              * forage:  먹이를 찾아다니다
① complex  social  hierarchy
③  mutual  insurance  system
⑤  effective  reproduction  process

② ecological  diversity
④  parasitic  relationship

25. One  of  the  little  understood  paradoxes  in  communication 
is  that  the  more  difficult  the  word,  the  shorter  the 
explanation.  The  more  meaning  you  can  pack  into  a  single 
word,  the  fewer  words  are  needed  to  get  the  idea  across.  Big 
words  are  resented  by  persons  who  don’t  understand  them 
and,  of  course,  very  often  they  are  used  to  confuse  and 
impress  rather  than  clarify.  But  this  is  not  the  fault  of 
language;  it  is  the  arrogance  of  the  individual  who  misuses 
the  tools  of  communication.  The  best  reason  for  acquiring  a 
large  vocabulary  is  that                                                        .  A  genuinely 
educated  person  can  express  himself  tersely  and  trimly.  For 
example,  if  you  don’t  know,  or  use,  the  word  ‘imbricate,’ 
you  have  to  say  to  someone,  ‘having  the  edges  overlapping 
in  a  regular  arrangement  like  tiles  on  a  roof,  scales  on  a 
fish,  or  sepals  on  a  plant.’  More  than  20  words  to  say  what 
can  be  said  in  one.

①  it  keeps  you  from  being  long-winded
②  you  can  avoid  critical  misunderstandings
③  it  enables  you  to  hide  your  true  intentions
④  it  makes  you  express  yourself  more  impressively
⑤  you  can  use  an  easy  word  instead  of  a  difficult  one

26. So  far  as  you  are  wholly  concentrated  on  bringing  about 
a  certain  result,  clearly  the  quicker  and  easier  it  is  brought 
about  the  better.  Your  resolve  to  secure  a  sufficiency  of 
food  for  yourself  and  your  family  will  induce  you  to  spend 
weary  days  in  tilling  the  ground  and  tending  livestock;  but 
if  Nature  provided  food  and  meat  in  abundance  ready  for 
the  table,  you  would  thank  Nature  for  sparing  you  much 
labor  and  consider  yourself  so  much  the  better  off.  An 
executed  purpose,  in  short,  is  a  transaction  in  which  the  time 
and  energy  spent  on  the  execution  are  balanced  against  the 
in  which   
resulting  assets,  and 
is  one 
  .  Purpose,  then,  justifies  the 

ideal  case 

the 

efforts  it  exacts  only  conditionally,  by  their  fruits.  [3점]

①  demand  exceeds  supply,  resulting  in  greater  returns
②  life  becomes  fruitful  with  our  endless  pursuit  of  dreams
③ the  time  and  energy  are  limitless  and  assets  are  abundant
④ Nature  does  not  reward  those  who  do  not  exert  efforts
⑤ the  former  approximates  to  zero  and  the  latter  to  infinity

3

8

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4

외국어(영어) 영역

홀수형

27. Psychologist  Solomon  Asch  wanted  to  discover  whether 
people’s  tendency  to  agree  with  their  peers  was  stronger 
than  their  tendency  toward  independent  thought  and  rational 
judgment.  Asch  assembled  groups  of  twelve  university 
students  and  announced  that  they  were  taking  part  in  an 
experiment  on  visual  perception.  He  showed  them  three  line 
segments,  and  asked  each  one  in  turn  which  line  was  the 
longest.  It  was  an  easy  task  and  the  correct  answer  was 
obvious.  However,  Asch  had  secretly  instructed  all  but  the 
last  person  in  each  group,  who  was  the  real  subject  of  the 
experiment,  to  say  that  the  medium-length  line  was  the 
longest.  As  it  turned  out,  over  70  percent  of  the  real  subjects   
                                                  and  said  that  the  medium-length 
line  was  the  longest.

①  caved  in  to  group  pressure
②  figured  out  the  correct  answer
③  had  problems  with  their  vision
④  roped  the  other  group  members  in
⑤  used  rational  judgment  in  their  decision-making

28. Journeys  are  the  midwives  of  thought.  Few  places  are 
more  conducive  to  internal  conversations  than  a  moving  plane, 
ship,  or  train.  There  is  an  almost  peculiar  correlation  between 
what  is  in  front  of  our  eyes  and  the  thoughts  we  are  able  to 
have  in  our  heads:  large  thoughts  at  times  requiring  large 
views,  new  thoughts  new  places.  Introspective  ref lections 
which  are  liable  to  stall  are  helped  along  by  the  f low  of  the 
landscape.  The  mind                                           when  thinking 
is  all  it  is  supposed  to  do.  The  task  can  be  as  paralyzing  as 
having  to  tell  a  joke  or  mimic  an  accent  on  demand.  Thinking 
improves  when  parts  of  the  mind  are  given  other  tasks,  are 
charged  with  listening  to  music  or  following  a  line  of  trees. 

①  may  be  reluctant  to  think  properly
②  may  focus  better  on  future  thoughts 
③  can  become  confused  by  multitasking
④  is  likely  to  be  paralyzed  by  fear  of  new  tasks
⑤  can  be  distracted  from  what  is  before  the  eyes

29. It  is  a  fundamental  mistake  to  imagine  that  when  we  see 
the  non-value  in  a  value  or  the  untruth  in  a  truth,  the  value 
or  the  truth  ceases  to  exist.  It  has  only  become  relative. 
Everything  human  is  relative,  because  everything  rests  on 
an  inner  polarity;  for  everything  is  a  phenomenon  of  energy. 
Energy  necessarily  depends  on  a  pre-existing  polarity,  without 
which  there  could  be  no  energy.  There  must  always  be  high 
and  low,  hot  and  cold,  etc.,  so  that  the  equilibrating 
process  ―  which  is  energy ― can  take  place.  Therefore  the 
tendency  to  deny  all  previous  values  in  favor  of  their 
opposites  is  just                                                             .  And  in  so 
far  as  it  is  a  question  of  rejecting  universally  accepted  and 
indubitable  values,  the  result  is  a  fatal  loss.  [3점]

①  another  way  of  pursuing  relativeness  in  human  affairs
②  as  desirable  as  the  tendency  to  accept  all  those  values
③ as  much  of  an  exaggeration  as  the  earlier  onesidedness
④ the  one  and  only  way  of  approaching  the  ultimate  truth
⑤ to admit the presence of energy derived from an inner polarity

30. 다음 글에 드러난 Jess의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?  [1점]

Jess  took  another  step  forward.  The  ground  fell  with 
unexpected  sharpness,  and  the  water  level  seemed  to  jump 
from  her  knees  to  her  waist.  She  stopped  for  a  moment  and 
anxiously  scanned  the  river  before  her.  Her  legs  started  to 
shake  and  she  felt  her  body  stiffen.  And  this  was  an 
unknown  river.  There  could  be  reeds,  or  other  dangers  she 
didn’t  know  about.  She  was  concerned  that  as  a  townie, 
she’d  had  little  experience  of  the  countryside,  and  none  at 
all  of  swimming  in  rivers.  It  didn’t  look  safe  enough  but  she 
didn’t  want  to  turn  back.  She  took  a  deep  breath  and  pushed 
herself  into  the  water.  It  felt  nice  and  cool,  not  as  freezing 
as  when  she  had  first  stepped  into  it.  The  water  seemed  to 
welcome  and  embrace  her.  She  liked  the  clean,  luxuriant 
feeling  as  she  swept  down  with  the  current. 

①  bored → amused
③  joyous → terrified
⑤  afraid → disappointed

②  worried → pleased
④  excited → sorrowful

31. (A),  (B),  (C)의  각  네모  안에서  문맥에  맞는  낱말로  가장 

적절한 것은?

Contrary  to  what  we  usually  believe,  the  best  moments  in 
our  lives  are  not  the  passive,  receptive,  relaxing  times ―
although  such  experiences  can  also  be  enjoyable,  if  we  have 
worked  hard  to (A) attain / avoid them.  The  best  moments 
usually  occur  when  a  person’s  body  or  mind  is  stretched  to 
its  limits  in  a  voluntary  effort  to  accomplish  something 
difficult  and  worthwhile. (B) Optimal / Minimal experience 
is  thus  something  that  we  make  happen.  For  a  child,  it  could 
be  placing  with  trembling  fingers  the  last  block  on  a  tower  she 
has  built,  higher  than  any  she  has  built  so  far;  for  a  sprinter, 
it  could  be  trying  to  beat  his  own  record;  for  a  violinist, 
mastering  an (C) uncomplicated / intricate musical  passage. 
For  each  person  there  are  thousands  of  opportunities,  challenges 
to  expand  ourselves.

(A)

(B)

(C)

① attain …… Minimal …… uncomplicated
②  attain …… Optimal …… intricate
③  attain …… Optimal …… uncomplicated
④ avoid …… Optimal …… intricate
⑤ avoid …… Minimal …… uncomplicated

32. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중,  문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 

않은  것은?

Many  people  take  numerous  photos  while  traveling  or  on 
vacation  or  during  significant  life  celebrations  to ① preserve 
the  experience  for  the  future.  But  the  role  of  photographer 
may  actually  detract  from  their ② delight  in  the  present 
moment.  I  know  a  father  who  devoted  himself  earnestly  to 
photographing  the  birth  of  his  first  and  only  child.  The 
photos  were  beautiful  but,  he ③ lamented  afterward  he  felt 
that  he  had  missed  out  on  the  most  important  first  moment 
of  his  son’s  life.  Looking  through  the  camera  lens  made  him 
④ detached  from  the  scene.  He  was  just  an  observer,  not  an 
experiencer.  Teach  yourself  to  use  your  camera  in  a  way 
that ⑤ neglects  your  ongoing  experiences,  by  truly  looking 
at  things  and  noticing  what  is  beautiful  and  meaningful.

4

8

홀수형

외국어(영어) 영역
외국어(영어) 영역

5
5

33. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A),  (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?

(A)

No  matter  how  good  your  product  is,  remember  that 
perfection  of  an  existing  product  is  not  necessarily  the  best 
investment  one  can  make.
, the  Erie  Canal,  which 
took  four  years  to  build,  was  regarded  as  the  height  of 
efficiency  in  its  day.  What  its  builders  had  not  considered 
was  that  the  advent  of  the  railroad  would  assure  the  canal’s 
instant  downfall.  By  the  time  the  canal  was  finished,  the 
railroad  had  been  established  as  the  fittest  technology  for 
transportation.
, when  the  fuel  cell  becomes  the 
automotive  engine  of  choice,  the  car  companies  focusing  on 
increasing  the  efficiency  of  the  internal  combustion  engine 
may  find  themselves  left  behind.  Is  it  time  to  keep  making 
what  you  are  making?  Or  is  it  time  to  create  a  new  niche? 
Innovation  requires  noticing  signals  outside  the  company 
itself:  signals  in  the  community,  the  environment,  and  the 
world  at  large.                                                        * niche:  틈새

(B)

(A)

(B)

① Furthermore …… Nevertheless
②  Furthermore …… Otherwise
③  For  example …… Likewise
④ For  example …… However
⑤ In  contrast

…… Besides

[34～35] 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 

34. Experienced  writers  invariably  write  in  a  climate  of 
discussion.  Their  writing  is  usually  embedded  in  a  context 
of  others’  ideas  and  opinions.  Many  writers,  especially  in 
the  academic  community,  are  directly  responding  to  other 
writers ― a  scientist  reexamining  the  experimental  procedures 
of  other  scientists;  a  literary  critic  taking  exception  to  a 
prevailing  method  of  interpretation;  a  sociologist  offering 
an  alternative  explanation  of  a  colleague’s  data;  a  historian 
participating  as  respondent  in  a  conference.  Such  people 
are  not  writing  in  a  vacuum.  Their  ideas  often  originate  in 
discussion,  their  writing  is  a  response  to  discussion,  and 
their  papers  are  designed  to  stimulate  further  discussion.

①  the  use  of  discussion  in  writing
②  the  need  for  self-criticism  in  writing
③  advantages  of  critical  thinking  on  writing
④  research  methods  in  scientific  experiments
⑤  types  of  persuasive  techniques  in  academic  fields

35. Habitat  diversity  refers  to  the  variety  of  places  where 
life  exists.  Each  habitat  is  the  home  of  numerous  species, 
most  of  which  depend  on  that  habitat.  When  it  disappears, 
a  vast  number  of  species  disappear  as  well.  More  often,  an 
entire  habitat  does  not  completely  disappear  but  instead  is 
reduced  gradually  until  only  small  patches  remain.  This 
has  happened  to  old-growth  forests  and  coastal  wetlands  in 
the  United  States  and  is  now  occurring  in  tropical  forests 
throughout  the  world.  Elimination  of  all  but  small  patches  of 
habitat  is  especially  damaging  because  it  not  only  eliminates 
many  local  species  but  also  threatens  those  species  that 
depend  on  vast  acreage  for  their  survival.

①  effects  of  habitat  reduction  on  climate  change
②  the  shrinkage  of  habitats  and  its  consequences
③  the  importance  of  forests  and  coastal  wetlands
④  the  relationship  between  types  of  habitats  and  species
⑤ ways  to  preserve  natural  habitats  for  endangered  species

36. 다음 글의 내용과 일치하는 것은?

Around  350  B.C.  there  lived  in  Greece  a  very  famous 
painter  named  Apelles.  It  was  his  practice  to  conceal 
himself  at  previews  of  his  paintings  in  order  to  hear  the 
public’s  opinions  of  his  masterpieces.  At  one  such  preview 
a  bootmaker  criticized  the  shoes  in  a  painting  on  which 
Apelles  had  labored  long  and  hard.  After  correcting  the 
picture  the  painter  arranged  a  second  preview.  This  time 
the  bootmaker  began  to  criticize  the  anatomy  of  one  of  the 
characters.  Apelles  was  unable  to  restrain  himself,  for  he 
knew  that  the  criticism  was  unjust  and  the  man  knew 
nothing  about  anatomy.  From  his  hiding  place  Apelles 
shouted,  “Bootmaker,  stick  to  your  last!”  From  that  time  it 
has  been  the  custom  to  ridicule  the  people  who  act  like 
they  know  what  they  do  not  with  the  pointed  caution, 
“Stick  to  your  last!”

①  기원전 350년경 그리스에 Apelles라는 무명의 화가가 살았다.
②  Apelles는 시연회에서 대중의 의견을 듣지 않으려고 하였다.
③  구두장이는 Apelles의 작품에 그려진 신발을 칭찬했다.
④  Apelles는 그림을 수정한 후 다시 시연회를 마련했다.
⑤  Apelles는 구두장이의 해부학적 지식이 풍부함을 인정했다.

37. bristlecone  pines에  관한  다음  글의  내용과  일치하지  않는 

것은?

Bristlecone  pines  are  unusual  trees  that  grow  in  the 
mountain  regions  of  western  America,  sometimes  as  high 
as  two  or  more  miles  above  sea  level.  They  grow  very 
slowly  and  range  from  15  to  40  feet  in  height.  These 
evergreens  often  live  for  thousands  of  years.  Considering 
the  habitat  of  these  trees,  such  as  rocky  areas  where  the  soil 
is  poor  and  precipitation  is  slight,  it  seems  almost  incredible 
that  they  should  live  so  long  or  even  survive  at  all.  The 
environmental  adversities,  however,  actually  contribute  to 
their  longevity.  Cells  that  are  produced  as  a  result  of  these 
conditions  are  densely  arranged.  The  densely  structured 
wood  is  resistant  to  invasion  by  insects  and  other  potential 
pests.  Bristlecone  pines  grow  faster  in  richer  conditions, 
but  die  earlier  and  soon  decay.  The  harshness  of  their 
surroundings,  then,  is  a  vital  factor  in  making  them  strong 
and  sturdy.

①  해발 2마일 이상 되는 곳에서 자라기도 한다. 
②  높이는 15피트에서 40피트 사이이다.
③  상록수로서 종종 수천 년 동안 산다. 
④  조직이 조밀하여 해충의 침입에 저항력이 있다.
⑤  보다 나은 환경에서는 더 빨리 자라고 더 오래 산다.

5

8

 
 
 
 
6

외국어(영어) 영역

홀수형

38. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은? 

The  above  graph  shows  the  percentage  of  children  from 
birth  to  5  years  of  age  by  gender  diagnosed  with  asthma 
in  rural  and  urban  areas  in  Canada  for  the  2000-2001, 
2002-2003,  and  2004-2005  periods. ① For  both  rural  and 
urban  areas,  the  percentages  of  male  children  diagnosed 
with  asthma  were  higher  than  those  of  female  children  for 
all  the  periods. ② During  all  the  periods,  the  percentages 
of  male  children  with  asthma  were  higher  in  urban  areas 
than  in  rural  areas. ③ Regarding  female  children  with 
asthma,  the  lowest  percentage  in  urban  areas  was  greater 
than  the  highest  percentage  in  rural  areas. ④ In  urban 
areas,  the  percentage  of  male  children  with  asthma  in  the 
2004-2005  period  was  lower  than  that  of  male  children 
with  asthma  in  the  2000-2001  period. ⑤ In  rural  areas, 
the  percentages  of  female  children  with  asthma  were  the 
same  in  the  2002-2003  period  and  the  2004-2005  period.
* asthma:  천식

[39～40] 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

39. Most  people  attack  a  new  problem  by  relying  heavily 
on  the  tools  and  skills  that  are  most  familiar  to  them. 
While  this  approach  can  work  well  for  problems  that  are 
similar  to  those  previously  solved,  it  often  fails,  and  fails 
miserably,  when  a  new  problem  is  particularly  novel.  In 
this  circumstance,  it  is  best  to  assume  nothing  and  treat 
the  problem  as  if  you  have  never  seen  anything  like  it 
before.  In  martial  arts,  this  sense  of  looking  freshly  at 
something  is  known  as  ‘beginner’s  mind.’  Beginners  to  any 
art  don’t  know  what  is  important  and  what  is  irrelevant,  so 
they  try  to  absorb  every  detail.  Experienced  martial  artists 
use  their  experience  as  a  filter  to  separate  the  essential 
from  the  irrelevant.  When  that  filter  mistakenly  screens 
out  something  essential,  then  even  seasoned  masters  can 
make  mistakes.

①  고도의 기술을 연마할 때 진지한 태도를 지녀야 한다.

②  실수를 거울삼아 자신의 발전을 도모하는 것이 필요하다.

③  이미 해결된 문제도 열린 마음으로 다시 볼 필요가 있다.

④  직관보다는 경험에 의존하여 문제를 해결하는 것이 중요하다.

⑤  새로운 문제는 초심자의 시각으로 접근하는 것이 바람직하다.

40. You  see  the  world  as  one  big  contest,  where  everyone 
is  competing  against  everybody  else.  You  feel  that  there  is 
a  set  amount  of  good  and  bad  fortune  out  there.  You  believe 
that  there  is  no  way  that  everyone  can  have  everything. 
When  other  people  fail,  you  feel  there’s  a  better  chance 
for  you  to  succeed.  However,  there  is  not  a  limited  supply 
of  resources  out  there.  When  one  person  wins,  everyone 
wins.  Every  victory  one  person  makes  is  a  breakthrough 
for  all.  Whenever  an  Olympic  swimmer  sets  a  new  world 
record,  it  inspires  others  to  bring  out  the  best  within  them 
and  go  beyond  that  achievement  to  set  new  records  of 
human  performance.  Whenever  a  geneticist  unlocks  new 
secrets  of  the  DNA  molecule,  it  adds  to  our  knowledge  base 
and  enables  us  to  better  the  human  condition.  Remember 
that  life  is  a  game  where  there  are  multiple  winners.

①  경쟁심은 기록 경신의 원동력이다. 

②  인생은 예상치 못한 변수로 가득하다.

③  성공하는 사람들은 성취동기가 분명하다.

④  자원이 한정된 세상에서 경쟁은 불가피하다.

⑤  한 사람의 성공은 다른 사람들에게도 이롭다.

[41～42] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

41. University  students  in  several  of  my  seminar  classes  sat 
in  a  circle  and  each  student  took  turns  telling  the  others 
his  or  her  name.  At  the  end  of  the  round  of  introductions, 
the  students  were  asked  to  write  down  the  names  of  as 
many  other  students  as  they  could  remember.  In  almost 
every  case,  students  wrote  down  the  names  of  students 
that  were  seated  far  away  from  them.  However,  surprisingly, 
they  weren’t  able  to  recall  the  names  of  students  who  were 
seated  close  to  them.  This  effect  was  worst  for  the  students 
who  sat  on  either  side  of  them.  What  was  the  reason  for 
such  findings?  The  student  who  was  next  in  line  for  an 
introduction  was  clearly  on  edge  and  after  finishing  his  or 
her  introduction,  he  or  she  was  preoccupied  with  calming 
his  or  her  nerves.  The  effect  was  clearly  due  to  the  social 
anxiety  they  experienced  immediately  before  and  after  having 
to  introduce  themselves  to  the  entire  group.

①  Ways  to  Cope  with  Nervousness
②  Useful  Strategies  for  Better  Memory
③  How  to  Remember  Uncommon  Names
④  Nervousness  and  Its  Effects  on  Memory
⑤  Seating  Arrangements  for  Better  Relations

6

8

홀수형

외국어(영어) 영역
외국어(영어) 영역

7
7

42. Richard  Dawkins  and  John  Krebs  argued  that  although 
in  some  circumstances  it  might  be  appropriate  to  describe 
animal  signals  as  transferring  information,  in  many  other, 
perhaps  most,  cases  there  would  be  such  a  conf lict  of 
interest  between  signaller  and  receiver  that  it  is  more  accurate 
to  describe  the  signaller  as  attempting  to  ‘manipulate’  the 
receiver  rather  than  just  inform  it.  For  example,  an  angler 
fish  that  dangles  a  worm-like  bit  of  skin  in  front  of  a  small 
fish  and  catches  it  because  the  smaller  fish  snaps  at  the 
‘worm’  can  certainly  be  said  to  have  carried  out  a  successful 
manipulation  of  its  prey.  In  this  case,  if  information  has 
been  transferred,  it  is  most  definitely  false.

* dangle:  매달다

①  Are  Smaller  Fishes  Smarter?
②  Talking  Animals:  Fact  or  Myth?
③  Cooperation  in  the  Animal  World 
④  Manipulation:  Tricking  the  Signaller
⑤  Animal  Messages:  Not  What  They  Seem

43. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은? 

The  body  has  been  viewed  as  a  ‘natural’  phenomenon
― a  fixed,  unchanging  fact  of  nature.  Recently,  however, 
it  is  also  being  seen  as  a  part  of  culture  in  the  sense 
that  it  can  be  socially  defined  in  different  ways.

(A) It  has  also  opened  up  new  questions  and  issues  in  the 
sociology  of  sport.  Some  people  in  the  sociology  of 
sport  are  now  working  with  colleagues 
in  other 
disciplines  who  share  interests  in  the  body.

(B) Social  definitions  of  the  body  are  grounded  in  social 
relations  and  inf luenced  by  those  with  the  power  to 
promote  agreement  about  what  should  be  considered 
‘natural’  when  it  comes  to  the  body.  This  new  way  of 
thinking  about  the  body  has  challenged  the  traditional 
mind-body  split  that  has  characterized  Western  thought 
since  the  time  of  Plato.

(C) In  their  work  they  are  asking  critical  questions  about 
how  the  body  is  trained,  disciplined,  and  manipulated  in 
sports  and  how  some  sport  scientists  are  using  technology 
to  probe,  monitor,  test,  evaluate,  and  rehabilitate  the 
body  as  a  performance  machine.

①  (A) - (B) - (C)
③  (B) - (C) - (A)
⑤  (C) - (B) - (A)

②  (B) - (A) - (C)
④  (C) - (A) - (B)

44. 글의 흐름으로 보아,  주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳은?

However,  recent  success  in  the  packaged-cookie  market 
suggests  that  these  may  not  be  the  only,  or  perhaps 
even  the  most  important,  reasons.

Why  eat  a  cookie?  Some  reasons  might  be  to  satisfy 
your  hunger,  to  increase  your  sugar  level,  or  just  to  have 
something  to  chew  on.  ( ① )  It  appears  that  cookie-producing 
companies  are  becoming  aware  of  some  other  inf luences 
and,  as  a  result,  are  delivering  to  the  market  products 
resulting  from  their  awareness.  ( ② )  These  relatively  new 
product  offerings  are  usually  referred  to  as  ‘soft’  or  ‘chewy’ 
cookies,  to  distinguish  them  from  the  more  typical  crunchy 
varieties.  ( ③ ) Why  all  the  fuss  over  their  introduction? 
( ④ )  Apparently  much  of  their  appeal  has  to  do  with 
childhood  memories  of  sitting  on  the  back  steps  devouring 
those  melt-in-your-mouth  cookies  that  were  delivered  by 
Mom  straight  from  the  oven,  while  they  were  still  soft.   
( ⑤ )  This  emotional  and  sensory  appeal  of  soft  cookies  is 
apparently  at  least  as  strong  as  are  the  physical  cravings 
that  the  product  satisfies.

45. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다.  빈칸 (A)와 

(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? 

Unlike  the  modern  society,  the  primitive  society  has 
less  specialized  knowledge  to  transmit,  and  since  its  way 
of  life  is  enacted  before  the  eyes  of  all,  it  has  no  need 
to  create  a  separate  institution  of  education  such  as  the 
school.  Instead,  the  child  acquires  the  heritage  of  his 
culture  by  observing  and  imitating  adults  in  such  activities 
as  rituals,  hunts,  festivals,  cultivation,  and  harvesting. 
As  a  result,  there  is  little  or  none  of  that  alienation  of 
young  from  old  so  marked  in  modern  industrial  societies. 
A  further  reason  for  this  alienation  in  modern  societies 
is  that  in  his  conception  of  reality  the  modern  adult  owes 
less  to  his  direct  experience  and  more  to  the  experience 
of  his  culture  than  does  primitive  man.  Clearly,  his  debt 
to  culture  will  vary  with  the  nature  of  his  education. 
Hence,  the  contemporary  child  must  travel  much  further 
than  the  offspring  of  primitive  man  to  acquire  the  world 
view  of  his  elders.  He  is,  therefore,  that  much  more 
removed  from  the  adults  of  his  society. 

󰀻

Unlike  the  primitive  child  who  learns  from  his 
surroundings,  the  modern  child  learns  in  educational 
institutions,  which  results  in 
from  his  elders.

(B)

(A)

(B)

…… interference

(A)
① foreign
② immediate …… sympathy
…… sympathy
③ foreign
④ imaginary …… alienation
⑤ immediate …… alienation

7

8

 
8

외국어(영어) 영역

홀수형

[46～47] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.

(B)

Many  people  believe  that  it  is  critical  to  share  similar,  if 
not  identical,  beliefs  and  values  with  someone  with  whom 
they  have  a  relationship.  While  this  may  seem  preferable,  it 
is  far  from  mandatory.  Individuals  from  extremely  diverse 
backgrounds  have  learned  to  overlook  their  differences  and 
live  harmonious,  loving  lives  together.  I’ve  seen  people 
from  opposite  ends  of  the  spectrum  economically  and 
politically  that  ended  up  in  happy,  lasting  marriages.  I’ve 
seen  couples  from  different  ethnic  groups  merge  into 
harmonious  relationships,  and  I’ve  seen  people  from 
different  religions  come  together  for  a  strong,  lasting  bond. 
Furthermore,  many  good  friends  have  little  in  common 
except  a  warm  loving  feeling  of  respect  and  rapport. 
That’s  the  only  essential  thing.

People  who  enjoy  the  best  relationships  with  others,  who 
live  life  with  the  least  frustration  regarding  their  differences, 
have  learned  that  differences  are  to  be  expected,  a  fact  of 
life.  This  understanding  must  go  beyond  a  mere  intellectual 
‘I  know  we’re  all  different.’  You  must  truly  own  this  idea 
and  incorporate  it  into  your  daily  life. 

The  way  I  see  it,  we  have  only  two  realistic  choices. 
We  can                          
the  principle  of  separate  realities  and 
remain  frustrated  and  angry  over  the  fact  that  no  one 
seems  to  conform  to  our  way  of  thinking,  or  we  can 
strive  to  understand  what  in  Eastern  philosophy  is  called 
‘the  way  of  things.’  Separate  realities  is  the  way  things 
really  are.  Everyone  is  unique  and  has  different  gifts  to 
offer.  When  we  look  for  these  gifts  we  will  surely  find 
them ― and  in  doing  so,  we  will  open  the  door  to  a  world 
of  personal  growth.                        *  rapport:  친밀한(공감적인)  관계

46. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?

①  Facing  Challenges  in  Life
②  Leading  an  Intellectual  Life
③  Finding  Meaning  in  Friendship
④  Accepting  Differences  in  Others
⑤  Enriching  Life  through  Meditation

She  knew  that  her  class  had  little  trouble  with  simple 
variations  and  could  easily  identify  themes  that  were 
repeated  in  a  similar  way.  But  when  the  theme  showed 
much  variation,  the  students’  attention  focused  on  the  new 
detail  to  such  an  extent  that  they  no  longer  ‘heard’  the 
basic  theme.  For  a  week  or  two,  the  teacher  worried  about 
the  problem.  Other  teachers  advised  (b) her  to  go  on  with 
something  else,  but  she  continued  to  search  for  a  solution.

(C) 

The  following  day  in  class,  (c) she  asked  how  many 
students  had  tape  recorders.  A  dozen  or  so  students  said, 
“I  do.”  The  teacher  said  excitedly,  “I  have  an  idea.  Let’s 
play  Beethoven’s  Eroica  again.  One  of  you  can  record  the 
theme  when  it’s  first  introduced.  Then  later,  someone  else 
can  record  it  the  second  time  it  appears.  Finally,  we’ll 
have  another  person  record  when  it  appears  next.  Then  we 
can  start  all  three  tape  recorders  at  exactly  the  same  time 
to  see  if  the  recordings  fit!”  Her  students  looked  at  (d) her 
in  surprise.  Suddenly,  however,  delight  appeared  on  their 
faces.  And  so  it  was  done.  When  they  played  the  recordings 
simultaneously,  the  sounds  blended  sufficiently  for  the 
students  to  recognize  their  commonality.

(D)

With  this  problem  in  mind,  one  afternoon  during  the 
lunch  hour,  she  noticed  a  group  of  students  gathered  in  a 
corner  of  the  school  yard.  Several  girls  were  moving  their 
bodies  rhythmically.  Curious,  she  drew  closer  and  found 
that  the  students  were  listening  to  a  new  rock  hit.  A  girl 
in  the  center  of  the  group  held  a  tape  recorder  in  (e) her 
hand.  At  that  moment,  a  sudden  inspiration  took  hold.

48. 주어진  글 (A)에  이어질  내용을  순서에  맞게  배열한  것으로 

가장 적절한 것은? 

①  (B) - (C) - (D)
③  (C) - (B) - (D)
⑤  (D) - (B) - (C)

②  (B) - (D) - (C)
④  (C) - (D) - (B)

47. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?

49. 밑줄  친 (a)～(e)  중에서  가리키는  대상이  나머지  넷과  다른 

①  resist
④  grasp

②  establish
⑤  overestimate

③  master

것은?

①  (a)

②  (b)

③  (c)

④  (d)

⑤  (e)

[48～50] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.

(A)

After  several  futile  attempts  to  teach  the  role  of  theme, 
or  the  prominent  repeated  melody,  in  classical  music,  the 
teacher  was  at  wit’s  end.  Having  reminded  her  students 
many  times  that  composers  like  Wagner  depended  on  the 
listeners’  remembering  the  earlier  theme  to  recognize  its 
later  use,  (a) she  was  determined  to  make  her  students 
understand  that  themes  recur  throughout  a  piece. 

50. 주어진 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은?

① 교사는 고전 음악에서 주제가 반복됨을 학생들에게 이해시키려 했다.
②  학생들은 단순한 변주 부분을 이해하는 데 별 문제가 없었다.
③  교사는 학생들에게 녹음기를 가지고 있는지를 물었다.
④ 학생들은 자신들이 녹음한 세 부분을 차례로 재생해 들었다.
⑤ 몇몇 학생들이 점심시간에 운동장에서 록 음악을 듣고 있었다.

*  확인 사항

◦ 답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인

하시오.

8

8

 
※ 시험이 시작되기 전까지 표지를 넘기지 마시오.

