2014학년도 대학수학능력시험 9월 모의평가 문제지

1

제 3 교시

  1번부터  22번까지는  듣고  답하는  문제입니다.  1번부터 

20번까지는  한  번만  들려주고,  21번부터  22번까지는  두  번 

들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.

1. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 

적절한 것을 고르시오.

①  Sure.  You’ll  love  the  activity  you’ve  signed  up  for.
②  Don’t  worry.  You’ll  make  a  lot  of  friends.
③  Good.  You  should  stop  your  bad  habits.
④  You’re  right.  My  schedule  isn’t  always  full.
⑤  Okay.  Let  me  explain  the  activities  one  by  one.

2. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 

적절한 것을 고르시오.

①  That  was  the  best  coffee  I’ve  ever  tasted.
②  I’ve  been  standing  in  line  for  20  minutes.
③  No  wonder  this  place  is  crowded  with  people.
④  That’s  because  I  already  bought  a  coffee  maker.
⑤  Be  careful  not  to  burn  your  mouth  with  the  coffee.

3. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 

적절한 것을 고르시오.

①  Sure.  What’s  the  best  tourist  attraction  to  visit?
②  How  much  money  should  I  budget  for  souvenirs?
③  Yeah,  you’re  right.  It’s  better  to  be  safe  than  sorry.
④  I  know.  I  need  to  check  the  weight  of  my  luggage.
⑤  No.  The  insurance  doesn’t  cover  this  emergency  case.

4. 다음을  듣고,  남자가  하는  말의  목적으로  가장  적절한  것을 

고르시오.

①  진공청소기를 광고하려고

②  청소 대행업체를 소개하려고

③  전자 제품 매장을 홍보하려고
④  층간 소음 줄이기를 부탁하려고

⑤  청소기 작동 방법을 설명하려고

고르시오.

①  사과가 건강에 좋은 이유

②  규칙적인 식습관의 중요성

③  과일을 통한 노화 예방책

④  신선한 사과 선별 기준

⑤  효과적인 사과 보관법

5. 다음을  듣고,  여자가  하는  말의  주제로  가장  적절한  것을 

6. 대화를  듣고,  두  사람이  하는  말의  주제로  가장  적절한  것을 

고르시오.

①  여가 시간 활용법

②  재택근무의 장점

③  교통 체증의 원인

④  에너지 절약의 중요성

⑤  업무 스트레스 해소법

7. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

①  전자 제품 가격이 지나치게 상승하고 있다.

②  전자 제품 폐기물 문제가 심각해지고 있다.

③  전자 제품 사용법이 점점 더 복잡해지고 있다.

④  에너지 효율이 높은 전자 제품 사용이 중요하다.

⑤  사용자 의견을 반영한 전자 제품 개발이 필요하다.

8. 대화를 듣고,  두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오. 

①  교사 － 학생

③  점원 － 고객

⑤  화가 － 모델

②  감독 － 배우

④  코치 － 선수

9. 대화를  듣고,  그림에서  대화의  내용과  일치하지  않는  것을 

고르시오.

10. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 여자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 

고르시오.

①  점심 사다 주기 

③  사진 찍어 주기

⑤  기사 작성하기 

1

8

②  식당 함께 가기

④  잡지 구매하기

이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.11. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 남자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을 

18. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 

2

고르시오.

①  to  buy  some  drinks  for  the  meeting
②  to  borrow  the  printer  from  the  sales  department
③  to  print  out  the  new  contract  at  the  Internet  Cafe
④  to  set  up  the  new  schedule  for  the  meeting
⑤  to  make  a  phone  call  to  the  repairperson

적절한 것을 고르시오.

Man:

①  I’m  sure  you’ll  enjoy  reading  the  book,  too. 
②  Okay.  I’m  going  to  make  a  list  of  my  own. 
③  I  agree.  It’s  really  difficult  to  reach  the  goal. 
④  Don’t  give  up,  and  you  can  fulfill  your  dreams.
⑤  Well,  keeping  a  diary  helps  you  to  find  a  solution.

12. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 카메라를 싸게 구입한 이유를 고르시오.

①  공동으로 구매해서

②  쿠폰이 있어서

19. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 

③  할인 기간이어서 

⑤  진열 상품이어서

④  반품된 상품이어서

적절한 것을 고르시오.

Woman:

13. 대화를  듣고,  자동차  렌트  시  고려할  사항으로  두  사람이 

언급하지 않은  것을 고르시오.

①  자동차 크기

③  도로 상태

⑤  렌트 기간

②  연료 소비량

④  자동차 보험

① Everything  will  be  over  before  you  even  realize  it.
② It  seems  you’ve  adapted  to  your  surroundings  well.
③ Sounds  like  you’re  taking  on  more  than  you  can  handle.
④ Cramming  all  night  will  distract  you  from  your  tasks.
⑤ Scratching  the  surface  will  never  accomplish  the  goal.

20. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고,  Jane이 Tom에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 

14. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.  [3점]

① $27

② $36

③ $40

④ $45

⑤ $54

것을 고르시오.

Jane: 

15. Future  Lawyers’  Internship  Program에  관한  다음  설명을 

①  I  can’t  agree  with  you  on  the  ticket  price.
②  I  really  can’t  wait  to  meet  the  fans  tonight.
③  Our  concert  will  definitely  be  a  big  success.
④  The  safety  of  the  audience  is  our  first  concern.
⑤  I’m  pleased  that  many  people  enjoyed  the  concert.

듣고,  일치하지 않는  것을 고르시오.

①  대학교 4학년 학생은 지원 가능하다.

②  지원자는 법학 전공자이어야 한다.

③  영어 실력이 좋은 지원자가 유리하다.

④  지원 가능 연령에 제한이 있다.

⑤  지원 마감일은 이번 주 금요일이다.

16. Tasmanian  tiger에  관한  다음  내용을  듣고,  일치하지  않는 

것을 고르시오.  [3점]

①  약 4,000년 전까지 호주 대륙에 살았었다. 

②  등에 검은 줄무늬가 있었다. 

③  위장은 한 번에 많은 먹이를 먹을 수 있도록 늘어났다.
④  들개와의 경쟁에서 져서 Tasmania  섬에서 멸종되었다.

⑤  양을 키우는 농부에 의해서 사냥을 당했다.

17. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고,  두 사람이 선택한 여행 상품을 

고르시오.

[21～22] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.

21. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?  [3점]

①  effects  of  air  pollution  on  farming
②  ways  to  promote  local  fruit  farming
③  problems  caused  by  food  transportation
④  origins  of  various  agricultural  produce
⑤  the  change  in  food  production  patterns

22. 식품으로 언급되지 않은  것은?

①  tomatoes
③  bananas
⑤  lettuce

②  kiwi  fruits
④  apples

①

②

③

④

⑤

  이제 듣기․말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 23번부터는 문제지의 
지시에 따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.

2

8

이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.23. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?

25. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?

When  people  expect  to  see  someone  again,  they  are 
more  likely  to  find  that  person  attractive,  regardless  of  the 
individual’s  behavior,  than  if  they  do  not  have  expectations 
of  future  interaction.  The  expectation  of  future  interaction 
motivates  people  to  look  for  positive  qualities  in  someone 
so  that  they  will  look  forward  to  future  interactions  rather 
than  dread  them,  and  increases  the  chances  that  people 
will  find  the  individual  attractive.  Conversely,  when  people 
interact  with  someone  whom  they  do  not  foresee  meeting 
again, 
to  search  for  positive 
qualities.  In  fact,  doing  so  may  be  depressing,  given  that 
they  may  not  have  the  opportunity  to  get  to  know  the 
person  better  in  future  interactions.  Indeed,  people  are 
in 
to 
sometimes  motivated 
individuals  whom  they  do  not  expect  to  see  again.

find  negative  qualities 

little  reason 

they  have 

① 다시 만날 가능성 여부가 상대방을 평가하는 데 영향을 준다.

② 바라는 것이 많을수록 상대방에 대한 단점을 발견하기 쉽다.

③ 상대방을 배려하는 자세가 원만한 대인 관계를 가능케 한다.

④ 타인에 대한 평가 기준으로 성격이 외모보다 우선시된다.

⑤ 첫인상은 상대방과의 향후 관계를 예측하는 기준이 된다.

24. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?

Even  when  scientists  are  able  to  identify  seemingly 
beneficial  nutrients,  they  cannot  always  understand  how 
those  nutrients  will  operate  in  a  real-life  context,  in  the 
course  of  our  daily  meals.  Fruits  and  vegetables  are  believed 
to  help  prevent  cancer.  Scientists  have  believed  that  it  is  the 
antioxidants  in  these  foods  that  make  the  difference ―
compounds  like  beta  carotene,  lycopene,  and  vitamin  E.  Yet 
when 
these  molecules  were  extracted  from  fruits  and 
vegetables  and  made  into  supplements,  they  did  not  reduce 
cancer.  The  beta  carotene  supplement  actually  increased  the 
risk  of  certain  cancers.  In  other  words,  scientists  thoroughly 
misunderstood  the  causes  of  complex  events.  They  identified 
one  element  engaged  in  the  process  of  nutrition  without 
fully  comprehending  how  the  system  as  a  whole  truly 
functions.  Nutritional  scientists ― pursuing  the  hot  paradigm 
of  isolating  nutrients ― failed  to  see  a  multitude  of  links  in 
the  complex  chain  that  leads  to  good  health.

① problems  of  making  nutritional  supplements  out  of  plants
② needs  for  an  alternative  scientific  method  for  isolating 

* antioxidant: 산화 방지제

③ insufficient  understanding  of  how  nutrients  work  in  the 

④ potential  benefits  of  extracting  molecules  from  fruits 

⑤ challenge  of  finding  beneficial  nutrients  that  may  help 

nutrients

whole  system

and  vegetables

prevent  cancers

3

in  a  game  people 

Artists  create  artistic  works  to  get  viewers  to  have 
certain  kinds  of  experiences.  But  the  intention  to  convey 
certain  experiences  to  viewers  is  sometimes  secondary  to 
the  intention  to  express  the  artistic  imagination  creatively. 
Consider  actions  generally  for  the  moment.  Think,  for 
example,  of  people  watching  their  favorite  sporting  team. 
Whether  it  is  at  an  actual  match  or  in  a  bar,  at  crucial 
periods 
in 
anticipation  or  cheer  in  exhortation.  They  often  want  to 
convey  their  sense  of  urgency  to  the  team,  or  people  at 
the  bar  may  want  to  show  their  disgust  to  others  in  the 
crowd.  But  they  often  express  themselves  in  this  manner 
without  any  thought  for  what  others  think  or  how  they 
through  which  we 
may  respond.  Actions  we  perform 
intend  to  express  our  feelings,  thoughts,  and  attitudes 
need  not  have  any  communicative  intent  for  how  others 
may  respond.  At  least  some  works  should  be  understood 
as  the  representation  of  just  this  kind  of  action.

to  make  gestures 

tend 

* exhortation: 권고,  충고

① Artistic  Act:  To  Express  Rather  than  to  Communicate
② Artistic  Masterpieces:  Products  of  Viewers’  Desires
③ Artistic  Works  Beyond  Artists’  Imagination
④ Artworks  Not  for  Artists  but  for  Viewers
⑤ Sports:  A  Tool  for  Expressing  Oneself?

26. 밑줄 친 her[She]가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른  것은?

from  Florida 

recently  moved 

I  was  reminded  of  our  mission  earlier  this  year  when 
my  mother  sold  her  house.  Because  of  my  father’s  failing 
to 
health,  my  parents 
Maryland  to  live  with  my  elder  sister  and ① her  family. 
At  my  mom’s  request,  my  brothers,  sisters,  and  I  sorted 
through  all ② her  belongings. ③ She  told  us  to  keep  or 
discard  whatever  we  pleased.  For  myself  I  kept  a  solitary 
piece  of  china,  one  of  the  few  remaining  plates  from  the 
set  my  grandfather  bought  my  mother  for ④ her  wedding. 
I  can  still  remember  the  set  in  better  days ― serving 
many  a  guest  on  a  Sunday  afternoon.  But  its  comrades 
have  all  been  broken  or  have  disappeared,  and  this  plate 
is  all  I  have.  It  is  delicate  and  faded ― you  can  no 
longer  read  the  pattern  name  printed  on  the  back.  But  it 
hangs  in  my  dining  room  as  a  pleasant  reminder  of ⑤ her 
hospitality.

3

8

이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.27. (A),  (B),  (C)의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장 

29. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은?

4

적절한 것은?  [3점]

It  had  long  been  something  of  a  mystery  where,  and 
on  what,  the  northern  fur  seals  of  the  eastern  Pacific  feed 
during the winter, (A) when / which they  spend  off 
the 
coast  of  North  America  from  California  to  Alaska.  There 
is  no  evidence  that  they  are  feeding  to  any  great  extent 
on  sardines,  mackerel,  or  other  commercially  important 
fishes.  Presumably  four  million  seals  could  not  compete 
with  commercial  fishermen  for  the  same  species  without 
the  fact  (B) being / is known.  But  there  is  some  evidence 
on  the  diet  of  the  fur  seals,  and  it  is  highly  significant. 
Their  stomachs  have  yielded  the  bones  of  a  species  of 
fish  that  has  never  been  seen  alive.  Indeed,  not  even  its 
remains (C) has / have been  found  anywhere  except  in  the 
stomachs  of  seals.  Ichthyologists  say  that  this  ‘seal  fish’ 
belongs  to  a  group  that  typically  inhabits  very  deep  water, 
off  the  edge  of  the  continental  shelf.

* ichthyologist: 어류학자

(B)

(A)

(C)
① when …… is
…… have
② when …… being …… have
③ which …… being …… have
④ which …… being …… has
…… has
⑤ which …… is

28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중,  문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 

않은  것은?

Occasionally, 

there  are  children  who  have 

trouble 
understanding  that  their  clothing  choice  is  inappropriate  or 
even  unhealthy.  Some  children ① follow  the  suggestion 
that  sandals  may  not  be  the  best  option  for  a  snowy  day. 
For  those  kids, ② experience  may  be  the  best  teacher. 
For  example,  when  Lydia  was  eight  years  old,  she 
insisted  on  wearing  her  favorite  sandals  to  school  despite 
③ warnings  that  the  sidewalks  were  covered  in  snow  and 
slush.  Her  mom ④ worried 
that  she  would  arrive  at 
school  with  cold,  wet  feet,  but  Lydia  would  not  change 
her  mind.  Of  course,  her  mother  was  right.  While  Lydia 
did  have  some  very  uncomfortable 
they 
became  soaked  and  frozen  on  her  way  to  and  from 
school,  she  learned  that  sometimes  fashion  isn’t ⑤ worth 
the  price  of  serious  discomfort.

toes  because 

4

8

increased  more 

The  above  graph  shows  the  percentage  of  women  in  wage 
employment  in  the  non-agricultural  sector  in  1990  and  2006.
① In  Latin  America  and  the  Caribbean,  women’s  waged 
non-agricultural  employment 
than  five 
percentage  points  between  1990  and  2006.  ② In  2006,  the 
percentage  of  women’s  waged  non-agricultural  employment 
in  East  Asia  and  Pacific  countries  was  twice  as  high  as  that 
of  South  Asia. ③ In  that  same  year,  the  percentage  of 
women’s  waged  non-agricultural  employment  in  the  Middle 
East  and  North  Africa  was  less  than  that  of  Sub-Saharan 
Africa  by  ten  percentage  points. ④ Despite  the  improvement 
between  1990  and  2006,  South  Asia  showed  the  smallest 
increase  in  the  percentage  of  women  in  waged  non-agricultural 
employment.  ⑤ Between  1990  and  2006,  the  increase  in  the 
percentage  of  women’s  waged  non-agricultural  employment 
in  Sub-Saharan  Africa  was  larger  than  that  of  the  Middle 
East  and  North  Africa.

30. Zelia  Maria  Magdalena  Nuttall에  관한  다음  글의  내용과 

일치하지 않는  것은?

American archaeologist-ethnohistorian Zelia Maria Magdalena 
Nuttall  was  well  known  especially  for  her  investigations  of 
pre-Columbian  culture  and  her  studies  of  Mexican  peoples 
and  native  Mexican  plants.  Nuttall  was  a  brilliant  archival 
researcher  and  self-trained  archaeologist  who  very  early  carved 
a  career  for  herself  by  pursuing  independent  research  and 
publishing  in  scholarly  journals.  Before  age  30  she  became 
a  member  of  several  highly  prestigious  scientific  societies 
on  the  basis  of  her  work.  She  was  the  winner  of  three 
medals  for  the  exhibits  of  the  results  of  her  archival  work 
and  archaeological  research,  which  she  presented  in  Europe 
and  the  United  States.  Nuttall  was  never  a  part  of  university 
teaching  faculty,  and  indeed  there  is  no  indication  that  she 
would  have  accepted  such  a  position  had  it  been  offered. 
Early  in  her  career,  she  was  appointed  Honorary  Assistant 
the  Peabody  Museum  of 
in  Mexican  Archaeology  at 
Harvard  University,  a  post  she  held  for  forty-seven  years.

* archival: 기록의

① 멕시코의 토종 식물에 관한 연구로 잘 알려졌다. 

② 독자적인 연구와 학술지 논문 발표를 통해 경력을 쌓았다.
③ 30세가 되기 전에 권위 있는 여러 학회의 회원이 되었다.

④ 기록 작업과 고고학 연구의 결과물 전시로 세 개의 메달을 받았다.
⑤ Harvard  대학의 교수로 47년간 학생들을 가르쳤다.

이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.[31～35] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

31. Wood  is  a  material  that  is  widely  acknowledged  to  be 
environmentally  friendly.  It  has  been  welcome  as  an 
alternative  material  for  a  long  time  in  building  houses 
instead  of  cement  or  bricks.  However,  it  is  not  always 
easy  to 
  of  one  particular 
material  such  as  wood  over  another.  Many  species  of  tree 
are  now  endangered,  including  mahogany  and  teak,  and 
deforestation,  particularly  in  tropical  rainforests,  has  had  a 
severe  impact  both  on  local  communities  and  on  native 
plants  and  wildlife.  Where  wood  is  harvested  and  then 
transported  halfway  across  the  globe,  the  associated  energy 
costs  are  high,  causing  a  negative 
the 
environment.  What  is  more,  where  wood  is  treated  with 
chemicals  to  improve  fire- and  pest-resistance,  its  healthful 
properties  are  compromised.

impact  on 

* mahogany: 마호가니(적갈색 열대산 목재)

①  increase  the  inherent  resistance
②  favor  the  chemical  properties
③  dominate  the  natural  habitats
④  evaluate  the  relative  merits
⑤  deny  the  cost  advantage

32. So  often,  we  get  caught  up  in  the  minutiae  of  our  jobs
― tedious  annoyances  and  struggles  that  may  be  temporary 
roadblocks  but  feel  more  like  concrete  mountains.  While 
there’s  plenty  of  research  that  shows  that  people  who 
work  with  the  muscles  above  their  neck  create  all  kinds 
of  stresses  for  themselves,  it’s  the  people  who  focus  on 
the  why  of  their  jobs  (as  opposed  to  the  what  and  the 
how)  who  can  manage  the  day-to-day  problems  more 
easily.  That  is,  if  you  can  define  the  purpose  of  your 
career  or  feel  passionate  about 
the  mission  of  your 
company,  you  can  much  more  easily  handle  the  occasional 
server  maintenance  that  disrupts  your  in-box.  The  flip  side 
is  that  if  you’re  working  in  any  area  (or  company)  that 
doesn’t  align  with  your  own  value,  all  the  little  stuff 

. 

* minutiae: 상세,  세목,  사소한 점

5

33. People  knowingly  or  unknowingly  will  take  too  much, 
even  though  it  is  not  for  anyone’s  collective  or  long-term 
good.  As  Hardin  put  it,  “Freedom  in  a  commons  brings 
ruin  to  all.”  Consider  a  traffic  jam  on  a  main  road  going 
into  any  big  city.  Each  person  picks  that  particular  road 
for  the  logical  reason  that  it’s  the  fastest  route.  In  the 
beginning,  each  additional  car  does  not  slow  the  traffic 
down,  as  there  is  enough  room  on  the  road  for  the 
additional  drivers.  At  some  point,  however,  each  car 
reduces  the  average  speed,  and  eventually  there  are  so 
many  drivers  that  the  traffic  slows  to  a  crawl.  All  the 
people  seeking  to  minimize  their  own  driving  time  add 
up  to  a  longer  commute  for  everyone.  Doing  what’s 
rational
,
including  you.  On  a  global  scale,  the  same  thing  can 
befall  environmental  issues  such  as  overfished  seas  and 
rivers,  air  pollution,  and  water  scarcity.  [3점]

① leads  to  logical  consequences  for  all  drivers
② is  compatible  with  the  maximum  benefit  of  each  driver
③ enhances  unselfish  interests  of  each  and  every  commuter
④ is  not  well  executed  by  the  unexpected  behaviors  of  some 

⑤ results  in  a  negative  outcome  to  the  collective  interest 

drivers

of  all  drivers

the  subjects  and  on  how 

34. Researchers  asked  college  student  volunteers  to  think 
through  a 
fantasy  version  of  an  experience (looking 
attractive  in  a  pair  of  high-heeled  shoes,  winning  an  essay 
contest,  or  getting  an  A  on  a  test)  and  then  evaluated  the 
fantasy’s  effect  on 
things 
unfolded  in  reality.  When  participants  envisioned  the  most 
positive  outcome,  their  energy  levels,  as  measured  by 
blood  pressure,  dropped,  and  they  reported  having  a  worse 
experience  with  the  actual  event  than  those  who  had 
conjured  more  realistic  or  even  negative  visions.  To  assess 
subjects’  real  life  experiences,  the  researchers  compared 
lists  of  goals  that  subjects  had  set  for  themselves  against 
what  they  had  actually  accomplished  and  also  relied  on 
self-reports.  “When  we  fantasize  about  it ― especially  when 
you  fantasize  something  very  positive ― it’s  almost  like 
the  study’s 
you  are  actually 
co-authors.  That
, 
draining  the  incentive  to  “get  energized  to  go  and  get  it,” 
she  explains.  Subjects  may  be  better  off  imagining  how  to 
surmount  obstacles  instead  of  ignoring  them.  [3점]

it,”  says  one  of 

living 

①  focuses  on  the  why,  belittling  the  what  and  the  how   
②  liberates  you  from  the  prison  of  daily  routines
③  snowballs  into  a  big  ball  of  daily  disasters
④  paves  your  way  to  climb  up  the  corporate  ladder
⑤  illuminates  the  true  value  of  what  you  have  to  do

① prompts  you  into  assessing  the  real  life  as  it  is
② turns  a  rosy  dream  into  an  actual  accomplishment 
③ renders  your  goal  independent  of  the  fantasy  world
④ tricks  the  mind  into  thinking  the  goal  has  been  achieved
⑤ deceives your mind into believing obstacles are insurmountable

5

8

이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.6

it 

impossible 

35. When  confronted  by  a  seemingly  simple  pointing  task, 
where  their  desires  are  put  in  conflict  with  outcomes, 
chimpanzees  find 
to  exhibit  subtle  self- 
serving  cognitive  strategies  in  the  immediate  presence  of 
tasks  are  mastered 
a  desired  reward.  However,  such 
.  In  one 
study,  chimps  were  confronted  by  a  simple  choice;  two 
plates  holding  tasty  food  items  were  presented,  each  with 
a  different  number  of  treats.  If  the  chimp  pointed  to  the 
plate  having  more  treats,  it  would  immediately  be  given 
to  a  fellow  chimp  in  an  adjacent  cage,  and  the  frustrated 
subject  would  receive  the  smaller  amount.  After  hundreds 
and  hundreds  of  trials,  these  chimps  could  not  learn  to 
withhold  pointing  to  the  larger  reward.  However,  these 
same  chimps  had  already  been  taught  the  symbolic  concept 
of  simple  numbers.  When  those  numbers  were  placed  on  the 
plates  as  a  substitute  for  the  actual  rewards,  the  chimps 
promptly  learned  to  point  to  the  smaller  numbers  first, 
thereby  obtaining  the  larger  rewards  for  themselves.  [3점]

① as  immediate  rewards  replace  delayed  ones
② when  an  alternative  symbol  system  is  employed
③ if  their  desires  for  the  larger  rewards  are  satisfied
④ when  material  rewards  alternate  with  symbolic  ones
⑤ if  the  value  of  the  number  is  proportional  to  the  amount 

of  the  reward

것을 고르시오.

[36～37] 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 

(A)

the  selected  option  and  decreasing 

36. After  making  a  choice,  the  decision  ultimately  changes 
our  estimated  pleasure,  enhancing  the  expected  pleasure 
the  expected 
from 
pleasure  from  the  rejected  option.  If  we  were  not  inclined 
the  value  of  our  options  rapidly  so  that 
to
they  concur  with  our  choices,  we  would  likely  second-guess 
ourselves  to  the  point  of  insanity.  We  would  ask  ourselves 
again  and  again  whether  we  should  have  chosen  Greece 
over  Thailand,  the  toaster  over  the  coffee  maker,  and  Jenny 
over  Michele.  Consistently  second-guessing  ourselves  would 
interfere  with  our  daily  functioning  and  promote  a  negative 
effect.  We  would  feel  anxious  and  confused,  regretful  and 
sad.  Have  we  done  the  right  thing?  Should  we  change  our 
mind?  These  thoughts  would  result  in  a  permanent  halt. 
We  would  find  ourselves ― literally ― stuck,  overcome  by 
and  unable  to  move  forward.  On  the  other 
hand,  reevaluating  our  alternatives  after  making  a  decision 
increases  our  commitment  to  the  action  taken  and  keeps  us 
moving  forward.  [3점]

(B)

(A)

(B)

① disregard …… indecision
② disregard …… decision
③ disclose …… decision
④ update …… prejudice
⑤ update …… indecision

(A)

37. Traditionally  we  have  assessed  mathematics  ability  based 
on  the  number  of  correct  answers  on  a  page  full  of 
computational  problems.  Learning  and  memorizing  facts, 
therefore,  was  the  key  component  to  the  mathematics 
instructional  program.  Recently,
, many  teachers 
have  started  placing  a  greater  emphasis  on  mathematical 
understanding,  problem  solving,  hands-on  experiences,  and 
collaborative  work.  This  change 
instructional 
program  can  be  attributed  to  well-informed  teachers  and  the 
work  of  the  National  Council  of  Teachers  of  Mathematics. 
Now  teachers  should  realize  that  their  students  will  be 
using  mathematics  in  a  world  where  calculators,  computers, 
technology  are  readily  available. 
and  other  forms  of 
Therefore,  the  application  of  mathematics,  rather  than  mere 
fact  acquisition,  is  what  will  be  expected  of  them  in  the 
workplace  and  in  life,  and 
  mathematics 
instruction  should  mirror  this  real  life  application.

the 

(B)

in 

(A)

(B)

① however …… otherwise
② however …… nonetheless
③ however …… consequently
④ moreover …… accordingly
⑤ moreover …… similarly

38. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?  [3점]

Most  of  the  words  we  use  and  the  meanings  we  think 

about  are  a  combination  of  simpler  ideas.

(A) Some  of  them  are  specialized  for  sitting  at  certain  high 
places,  like  bar  stools.  If  you  learned  about  a  culture 
in  which  a  certain  type  of  chair  was  used  only  for  the 
purpose  of  sitting  while  waiting  for  a  bus,  you  might 
think 
is  odd  but  would  have  no  difficulty 
this 
understanding  it. 

(B) Consider  a  chair.  Before  you  can  have  an  idea  of  a 
chair,  you  need  to  understand  that  there  exist  in  the 
world  certain  functional  objects.  Some  of  these  objects 
support  human  activity,  in  this  case,  sitting. 

(C) The  combination  of  the  concepts  chair  and  waiting  for 
bus  allows  you  to  create  the  new  complex  concept 
chair  used  while  waiting  for  bus.  But  the  basic  concept 
of  chair  is  built  out  of  the  simpler  ideas  that  we  take 
for  granted:  object,  furniture,  sitting.

①  (A) － (C) － (B) 
③  (B) － (C) － (A)
⑤  (C) － (B) － (A)

②  (B) － (A) － (C)
④  (C) － (A) － (B)

6

8

이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.7

39. 글의 흐름으로 보아,  주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳은?

[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.

The  experimenter  then  changed  the  context  so  that  the 
participants  had  to  do  a  subtly  different  task.

By  changing  the  focus  or  context  of  a  task,  we  can  get 
renewed  energy  even  when  we  feel  that  we  are  completely 
out  of  energy.  To  demonstrate  this,  a  psychologist  asked 
people  to  take  part  in  what  she  called  ‘semi-free  tasks’.  The 
tasks  included  drawing,  repeatedly  writing  ‘ababababababab...’, 
or  reading  a  short  poem.  ( ① )  The  participants  were 
asked  to  do  these  tasks  until  they  felt  exhausted.  ( ② ) 
Those  drawing  were  asked  to  redraw  their  last  picture  to 
demonstrate  how  quickly  they  could  draw.  ( ③ )  Those 
writing  ‘abab’  were  asked  to  sign  their  name  and  address. 
( ④ )  In  this  new  context  their  fatigue  disappeared.  ( ⑤ ) 
This  phenomenon  of  creating  a  second  wind  can  be  seen  in 
action  at  airports  where  security  officers  rotate  around  different 
stations  to  stop  routine-induced  fatigue  from  settling  in.

40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다.  빈칸 (A)와 

(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?

time  when  cities 

During  the  1970s,  researchers  began  to  suggest  that 
human  vulnerability  to  hazards,  rather  than  the  hazards 
themselves,  was  central  to  understanding  the  importance 
of  hazards,  particularly  when  considering  that  a  city  is  a 
geographical  focus  for  large  populations.  Further,  it  was 
reported  that  human  and  material  losses  from  disasters 
had  increased  during  the  20th  century.  This  happened  at 
a 
the  developing  world  were 
growing  at  unprecedented  rates,  bringing  together  large 
populations  of  low  income  urban  residents,  often  on 
hazardous  spontaneous  settlements  which  made  them  far 
more  vulnerable  to  natural  and  human-induced  hazards. 
It  is  precisely  this  issue  of  vulnerability  on  which  a 
number  of  social  scientists  focused,  arguing  that  although 
floods,  landslides  and  earthquakes  are  natural  processes, 
the  disasters  that  can  be  associated  with  them  are  not  a 
result  of  natural  processes,  but  of  human  vulnerability.

in 

󰀻

With  the  dramatic  growth  of 
  in  developing 
countries,  environmental  hazards  could  turn  into  disasters 
for  those  who  are  unable  to

  their  impacts.

(A)

(B)

If  you  don’t  get 

information  failure 
the  kind  of 
provides,  you’ll  end  up  with  unrealistic  expectations  for 
yourself,  explains  a  psychologist.  You  could  wind  up  in 
a  position  where  failure,  which  has  gathered  under  cover 
of  darkness,  reveals  itself  all  at  once. 

for  growth ― late 

is  a  sensitive  period 

We  should  hope,  then,  for  exposure  to  failure,  early 
that 
and  often.  The  sociologist  Glen  Elder  proposed 
teens 
there 
through  early  30s ― during  which  failures  are  most 
beneficial.  Such  a  pattern  seems  to  promote  the  trait 
sometimes  called  equanimity.  We  learn  that  trauma  is 
survivable,  so  we  don’t  plunge  too  deeply  following 
setbacks.  Nor,  conversely,  do  we  soar  too  high  on  our 
successes.  Some  businesses  in  Silicon  Valley  and  on 
Wall  Street  make  a  point  of  hiring  ex-pro  athletes  to 
their  staffs.  It’s  not  just  that  their  high  profile  draws 
business.  It’s  because  athletes  are  good  at  recovering 
from 
their  failures.  “We  needed  people  who  could 
perform  and  not  get  emotionally  attached  to  losses,”  a 
Chicago  oil  trader  told  the  New  York  Times,  explaining 
why 
floor, 
these.  The 
particularly 
image  is  of  a  rider  easy  in  the  saddle.  Nothing  can  so 
surprise  her ― either  for  good  or  ill ― that  she’ll  be 
knocked  off.

in  ugly  economic 

likes  athletes  on 

trading 

times 

firm 

like 

the 

the 

to  ensure  your 

knocking  you  off  course 

One  way  to  help  keep  life’s  slings  and  arrows  from 
is 
is 
,  says  Stephen  Berglas,  a  California 
psychologist  and  personal  coach.  That  way,  a  setback  in 
any  one  area  won’t  mean  in  your  mind  that  you’re  a 
failure  categorically.  Call  it  spreading  your  risk  across 
your  emotional  portfolio ― or  adding  another  leg  to  the 
furniture  for  balance,  says  Berglas.

life 

* equanimity: 마음의 평정

41. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?

①  Do  Not  Let  Failure  Fail  You
②  Recipe  for  Attaining  Physical  Stability
③  Physical  Toughness  and  Mental  Flexibility
④  How  to  Survive  Emotional  Unrest  in  Sports
⑤  Failure  as  an  Enemy  of  Emotional  Calmness

(A)

(B)

① population …… magnify
② economy …… figure  out
③ economy …… cope  with
…… cope  with
④ cities
…… magnify
⑤ cities

42. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?  [3점]

①  illusionary
③ convergent
⑤ multidimensional

②  predictable
④ straightforward

7

8

이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.

43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 

가장 적절한 것은?

①  (B) － (C) － (D)
②  (B) － (D) － (C)
③  (C) － (D) － (B)
④  (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤  (D) － (C) － (B)

44. 밑줄 친 (a)∼(e)  중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 

* unencumbered: 방해받지 않는

② (b)

③ (c)

④ (d)

⑤ (e)

것은?

① (a)

45. 위 글의 inspector에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은?

① Moravia에 있는 한 학교를 방문했다.

② 학생들의 학업 향상에 만족한다고 말했다. 

③ 말의 털이 몇 개인지 기억할 수 없었다고 말했다. 

④ 소년의 대답이 재미있었지만 억지로 웃음을 참았다. 
⑤ Vienna에 가서 동료들에게 이 이야기를 들려주겠다고 말했다.

8

(A)

(B)

(C)

(D)

To  be  creative  problem  solvers,  people  must  learn  to 
approach  complexity  with  a  certain  naive  simplicity.  And 
by  letting  their  thinking  become  more  free,  they  can 
improve  their  chances  of  discovering  new  unencumbered 
perceptions  of  old  problems  or  entirely  new  creations. 
For  this,  they  can  mentally  play  with  the  ideas  in  a 
childlike  manner.  Here  is  an  example  story.  In  a  small 
Moravian  village  at  the  time  of  the  old  Austrian  empire, 
an  inspector  from  the  Ministry  of  Education  arrived  one 
day  to  visit  the  schoolroom.  It  was  part  of  (a) his  duty 
to  make  such  periodic  inspections  of  the  schools.

At  the  end  of  the  hour,  after  he  had  observed  the 
class,  he  stood  up  and  said:  “I  am  glad  to  see  that  you 
children  are  doing  well  in  your  studies.  I  am  satisfied 
with  your  progress.  Therefore,  before  I  go,  there  is  one 
question  I  would  like  to  ask.  How  many  hairs  does  a 
horse  have?”  Very  quickly  one  little  nine-year-old  boy 
raised  his  hand,  to  the  astonishment  of  the  teacher  and 
the  visitor.  (b) He  stood  up  and  said,  “The  horse  has 
3,571,962  hairs.”  The  inspector  wonderingly  asked,  “And 
how  do  you  know  that  this  is  the  right  number?”  The 
boy  replied,  “If  you  do  not  believe  me,  you  could  count 
them  yourself.” 

It  was  a  year  later,  and  the  inspector  was  back  again 
at  the  village  school  for  his  annual  visit.  As  the  teacher 
was  walking  along  the  aisle  with  (c) him  to  the  door,  he 
stopped  and  said,  “By  the  way,  Mr.  Inspector,  how  did 
your  colleagues  like  the  story  of  the  horse  and  the 
number  of  his  hairs?”  The  inspector  slapped  the  teacher 
on  the  back.  “Oh  yes,”  he  said,  “you  know,  I  was 
really  very  anxious  to  tell  that  story ― and  a  fine  story 
it  was ― but  you  see,  I  wasn’t  able  for  the  life  of  me 
to  remember  the  number  of  hairs.”

The 

into 

loud 

laughter, 

inspector  broke 

thoroughly 
enjoying  the  boy’s  remark.  As  the  teacher  escorted  (d) him 
along  the  aisle  to  the  door,  still  laughing  heartily,  he 
said:  “What  an  amusing  story!  I  must  tell  this  story  to 
my  colleagues  when  I  return  to  Vienna.  I  can  already  see 
how  they  will  take  it;  they  enjoy  nothing  better  than  a 
good  joke.”  And  with  that,  he  took  (e) his  leave.

◦ 답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인

*  확인 사항

하시오.

8

8

이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다. 
